When it was the Three Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ibrahim son
of Al-Mahdi continued: "Now when the housemaster heard my name he
sprang to his feet and said, 'Indeed I wondered that such gifts
should belong to any but the like of thee; and Fortune hath done
me a good turn for which I cannot thank her too much. But, haply,
this is a dream; for how could I hope that one of the Caliphate
house should visit my humble home and carouse with me this
night?' I conjured him to be seated; so he sat down and began to
question me as to the cause of my visit in the most courteous
terms. So I told him the whole affair, first and last, hiding
naught, and said to him, 'Now as to the food I have had my will,
but of the hand and wrist I have still to win my wish.' Quoth he,
'Thou shalt have thy desire of the hand and wrist also,
Inshallah!' Then said he to the slave-girl, 'Ho, such an one, bid
such an one come down.' And he called his slave-girls down, one
by one and showed them to me; but I saw not my mistress among
them, and he said, 'O my lord, there is none left save my mother
and sister; but, by Allah, I must needs have them also down and
show them to thee.' So I marvelled at his courtesy and large
heartedness and said, 'May I be thy sacrifice! Begin with the
sister;' and he answered, 'With joy and goodwill.' So she came
down and he showed me her hand and behold, she was the owner of
the hand and wrist. Quoth I, 'Allah make me thy ransom! this is
the damsel whose hand and wrist I saw at the lattice.' Then he
sent his servants without stay or delay for witnesses and
bringing out two myriads of gold pieces, said to the
witnesses, 'This our lord and master, Ibrahim son of Al-Mahdi,
paternal-uncle of the Commander of the Faithful, seeketh in
marriage my sister such an one; and I call you to witness that I
give her in wedlock to him and that he hath settled upon her ten
thousand dinars.' And he said to me, 'I give thee my sister in
marriage, at the portion aforesaid.' 'I consent,' answered I,
'and am herewith content.' Whereupon he gave one of the bags to
her and the other to the witnesses, and said to me, 'O our lord,
I desire to adorn a chamber for thee, where thou mayst sleep with
thy wife.' But I was abashed at his generosity and was ashamed to
lie with her in his house; so I said, 'Equip her and send her to
my place.' And by thy being, O Commander of the Faithful, he sent
me with her such an equipage that my house, for all its
greatness, was too strait to hold it! And I begot on her this boy
that standeth in thy presence." Then Al-Maamun marvelled at the
man's generosity and said, "Gifted of Allah is he! Never heard I
of his like." And he bade Ibrahim bin al-Mahdi bring him to
court, that he might see him. He brought him and the Caliph
conversed with him; and his wit and good breeding so pleased him
that he made him one of his chief officers. And Allah is the
Giver, the Bestower! Men also relate the tale of




             THE WOMAN WHOSE HANDS WERE CUT OFF FOR
                    GIVING ALMS TO THE POOR.



A certain King once made proclamation to the people of his realm
saying, "If any of you give alms of aught, I will verily and
assuredly cut off his hand;" wherefore all the people abstained
from alms-deed, and none could give anything to any one. Now it
chanced that one day a beggar accosted a certain woman (and
indeed hunger was sore upon him), and said to her, "Give me an
alms"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

        When it was Three Hundred and Forty-eighth Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that, quoth the
beggar to the woman, "Give me an alms however small." But she
answered him, "How can I give thee aught, when the King cutteth
off the hands of all who give alms?" Then he said, "I conjure
thee by Allah Almighty, give me an alms;" so when he adjured her
by the Holy Name of Allah, she had ruth on him and gave him two
scones. The King heard of this; whereupon he called her before
him and cut off her hands, after which she returned to her house.
Now it chanced after a while that the King said to his mother, "I
have a mind to take a wife; so do thou marry me to a fair woman."
Quoth she, "There is among our female slaves one who is
unsurpassed in beauty; but she hath a grievous blemish." The King
asked, "What is that?" and his mother answered, "She hath had
both her hands cut off." Said he, "Let me see her." So she
brought her to him, and he was ravished by her and married her
and went in unto her; and begat upon her a son. Now this was the
woman who had given two scones as an alms to the asker, and whose
hands had been cut off therefor; and when the King married her,
her fellow-wives envied her and wrote to the common husband that
she was an unchaste, having just given birth to the boy; so he
wrote to his mother, bidding her carry the woman into the desert
and leave her there. The old Queen obeyed his commandment and
abandoned the woman and her son in the desert; whereupon she fell
to weeping for that which had befallen her and wailing with
exceeding sore wail. As she went along, she came to a river and
knelt down to drink, being overcome with excess of thirst, for
fatigue of walking and for grief; but, as she bent her head, the
child which was at her neck fell into the water. Then she sat
weeping bitter tears for her child, and as she wept, behold came
up two men, who said to her, "What maketh thee weep?" Quoth she,
"I had a child at my neck, and he hath fallen into the water."
They asked, "Wilt thou that we bring him out to thee?" and she
answered, "Yes." So they prayed to Almighty Allah, and the child
came forth of the water to her, safe and sound. Then said they,
"Wilt thou that Allah restore thee thy hands as they were?"
"Yes," replied she: whereupon they prayed to Allah (extolled and
exalted be He!) and her hands were restored to her, goodlier than
before. Then said they, "Knowest thou who we are?"; and she
replied, "Allah is all knowing;" and they said, "We are
thy two Scones of Bread, which thou gayest in alms to the asker
and which were the cause of the cutting off of thy hands.
So praise thou Allah Almighty for that He hath restored to thee
thy hands and thy child." Then she praised Almighty Allah and
glorified Him. And men relate a tale of




                     THE DEVOUT ISRAELITE.



There was once a devout man of the Children of Israel,
whose family span cotton-thread; and he used every day to sell
the yarn and buy fresh cotton, and with the profit he laid in
daily bread for his household. One morning he went out and sold
the day's yarn as wont, when there met him one of his brethren,
who complained to him of need; so he gave him the price of the
thread and returned, empty-handed, to his family, who said to
him, "Where is the cotton and the food?" Quoth he, "Such an one
met me and complained to me of want; whereupon I gave him the
price of the yarn." And they said, "How shall we do? We have
nothing to sell." Now they had a cracked trencher and a
jar; so he took them to the bazar but none would buy them of him.
However presently, as he stood in the market, there passed by a
man with a fish,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      