


The Say of Haykar the Sage


[Footnote 6] In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate, the Eternal One, the Termless, the Timeless, and of Him aidance we await. And here we begin (with the assistance of Allah Almighty and his fair furtherance) to invite the Story of Haykar the Sage, the Philosopher, the Wazir of Sankharib [Footnote 7] the Sovran, and of the son of the wise man's sister Nadan [8] the Fool.

They relate that during the days of Sankháríb the King, lord of Asúr [9] and Naynawah, [10] there was a Sage named Haykár, Grand Wazir of that Sovran and his chief secretary, and he was a grandee of abundant opulence and ampliest livelihood: ware was he and wise, a philosopher, and endowed with lore and counsel and experience. Now he had interwedded with threescore wives, for each and every of which he had builded in his palace her own bower; nonetheless he had not a boy to tend, and was he sore of sorrow therefor. So one day he gathered together the experts, astrologers and wizards, and related to them his case and complained of the condition caused by his barrenness. They made answer to him, "Get you within and do sacrifice to the Godheads and enquire of them and implore their favour when perhaps shall they vouchsafe unto you boon of babe." He did whatever they bade and set corbans and victims before the images and craved their assistance, humbling himself with prayer and petition; despite which they gave to him never a word of reply. So he fared forth in distress and disappointment and went his ways all disheartened.

Then he returned in his humiliation to Almighty Allah [11] and confided his secret unto Him and called for succour in the burning of his heart, and cried with a loud voice saying, "O God of Heaven and Earth, O Creator of all creatures, I beg you to vouchsafe unto me a son wherewith I may console my old age and who may become my heir, after being present at my death and closing my eyes and burying my body." Hereat came a Voice from Heaven which said, "Inasmuch as at first you trusted in graven images and offered to them victims, so shall you remain childless, lacking sons and daughters. However, get you up and take to you Nádán, your sister's child; and, after taking this nephew to son, do you inform him with your learning and your good breeding and your sagesse, and demise to him that he inherit of you after your decease."

Hereupon the Sage adopted his nephew Nadan, who was then young in years and a suckling, that he might teach him and train him; so he entrusted him to eight wet-nurses and dry-nurses for feeding and rearing, and they brought him up on diet the choicest with delicatest nurture and clothed him with sendal and escarlate [12] and dresses dyed with Alkermes, [13] and his sitting was upon shag-piled rugs of silk. But when Nadan grew great and walked and shot up even as the lofty Cedar [14] of Lebanon, his uncle taught him deportment and writing and reading [15] and philosophy and the omne scibile.

Now after a few days Sankharib the King looked upon Haykar and saw how that he had waxed an old old man, so said he to him, "Ho you excellent companion, [16] the generous, the ingenious, the judicious, the sagacious, the Sage, my Secretary and my Minister and the Concealer of my secrets and the Councillor of my kingdom, seeing how so it be that you are aged and well shot in years and nigh unto your death and decease, so tell me [17] who shall stand in my service after your demise?" Made answer Haykar, "O my lord the King, may your head live for ever and aye! that same shall be this Nadan, son to my sister, whom I have taken to myself as mine own child and have reared him and have taught him my learning and my experience, all thereof." "Bring him to the presence," said the King, "and set him between my hands, that I look upon him; and, if I find him fitting, I will establish him in your stead. Then do you wend your ways and off-go from office that you take your rest and tend your old age, living the lave of your life in the fairest of honor."

Hereupon Haykar hied him home and carried his nephew Nadan before the King, who considered him and was pleased with the highmost of pleasure and, rejoicing in him, presently asked the uncle, "Is this your adopted son, O Haykar? I pray Allah preserve him; and, even as you served my sire Sarhádún [18] before me, even so shall this your son do me suite and service and fulfil my affairs and my needs and my works, to the end that I may honor him and advance him for the sake of you." Thereat Haykar prostrated himself before the presence and said, "May your head live, O my lord, for evermore! I desire of you to extend the wings of your spirit over him for that he is my son, and do you be clement to his errings, so that he may serve you as is befitting." The King forthwith made oath that he would establish the youth among the highmost of his friends and the most worshipful of his familiars and that he should abide with him in all respect and reverence.

So Haykar kissed the royal hands and blessed his lord; then, taking with him Nadan his nephew, he seated him in privacy and fell to teaching him by night as well as by day, that he might fill him with wisdom and learning rather than with meat and drink; and he would address him in these terms. [19]

"O my dear son, [20] if a word come to your ears, suffer it to die within your heart nor ever disclose it unto other, lest perhaps it become a live coal [21] to burn up your tongue and breed pain in your body and clothe you in shame and make you despised of God and man.

O my dear son, if you hear a report reveal it not, and if you behold a thing relate it not. O my dear son, make easy your address unto your hearers, and be not hasty in return of reply. O my dear son, desire not formal beauty which fades and vades while fair report endures unto infinity.

O my dear son, be not deceived by a woman immodest of speech lest her snares waylay you [22] and in her springs you become a prey and you die by ignominious death. O my dear son, hanker not after a woman adulterated by art, such as clothes and cosmetics, who is of nature bold and immodest, and beware lest you obey her and give her anything that is not yours and entrust to her even that which is in your hand, for she will robe you in sin and Allah shall become angry with you.

O my dear son, be not like unto the almond-tree [23] which leafs earlier than every growth and despite that is ever of the latest to fruit; but strive to resemble the mulberry-tree which bears food the first of all growths and is the last of any to put forth her foliage. [24] O my dear son, bow your head before your inferior and soften your utterance and be courteous and tread in the paths of piety, and shun impudence and louden not your voice when you speak or laugh; for, were a house to be builded by volume of sound, the ass would edify many a mansion every day. [25]

O my dear son, the transport of stones with a man of wisdom is better than the drinking of wine with one blamed for folly. O my dear son, rather pour out your wine upon the tombs of the pious than drain it with those who give offence by their insolence. O my dear son, cleave to the sage that is Allah-fearing and strive to resemble him, and approach not the fool lest you become like him and learn his foolish ways.

O my dear son, when you affect a friend or a familiar, make trial of him and then company with him, and without such test nor praise him nor divulge your thoughts to one who is other than wise. O my dear son, as long as your boot is on your leg and foot, walk with it over the thorns and tread a way for your sons and your sons' sons; and build you a boat before the sea break into billows and breakers and drown you before you find an ark of safety.

O my dear son, when the rich man eats a snake, folks shall say that 'tis of his subtilty; but when a pauper feeds upon it, the world shall declare 'tis of his poverty. O my dear son, be content with your grade and your good, nor covet anything of your fellow.

O my dear son, be not neighbourly with the ignorant nor do you break with him bread, and joy not in the annoy of those about you and when your foe shall maltreat you meet him with beneficence. O my dear son, fear the man who fears not Allah and hold him in hate. O my dear son, the fool shall fall when he trips; but the wise man when he stumbles shall not tumble and if he come to the ground he shall rise up quickly, and when he sickens he shall readily heal himself, whereas to the malady of the ignorant and the stupid there is no remedy.

O my dear son, when a man lesser than yourself shall accost you, prevent him in standing respectfully before him, and if he suffice you not the Lord shall suffice you in his stead. O my dear son, spare not blows to your child, [26] for the beating of the boy is like manuring to the garden and binding to the purse-mouth and tethering to the cattle and locking to the door. O my dear son, withhold your child from wickedness, and discipline him before he wax great and become contumacious to you, thus belittling you among your equals and lowering your head upon the highways and in the assemblies, and you be described as an aider in his wrongful works.

O my dear son, let no word escape your lips without consulting your heart; nor stand up between two adversaries, for out of converse with the wicked comes enmity, and from enmity is bred battle, and from battle arises slaughter, when your testimony shall be required; nay, do you fly therefrom and be at rest. O my dear son, stand not up against one stronger than yourself; but possess your soul in patience and and long-suffering and forbearance and pacing the paths of piety, for than this nothing is more excellent.

O my dear son, exult not over the death of your enemy by cause that after a little while you shall become his neighbour. O my dear son, turn you a deaf ear to whoever jeers you, and honor him and forego him with the salam-salutation. O my dear son, when the water shall stand still in stream and the bird shall fly sky-high and the black raven shall whiten and myrrh shall wax honey-sweet, then will the ignorant and the fool comprehend and converse.

O my dear son, if you would be wise restrain your tongue from leasing and your hand from thieving and your eyes from evil glancing; and then, and then only, shall you be called a sage. O my dear son, suffer the wise man strike you with his staff rather than the fool anoint you with his sweetest unguent. [27] O my dear son, be you humble in your years of youth, that you may be honored in your old age. O my dear son, stand not up against a man in office and puissance nor against a river in its violence, and haste not in matters of marriage; for, if this bring weal, folk will not appraise you and if ill they will abuse you and curse you.

O my dear son, company with one who has his hand fulfilled and well-furnished and associate not with any whose hand is fist-like and famished. O my dear son, there are four things without stability: a king and no army, [28] a Wazir in difficulty for lack of counsel; among the folks villainy and over the lieges tyranny. Four things also may not be hidden; to wit, the sage and the fool, the richard and the pauper." [29]

Now when Haykar had made an end of these injunctions and instances addressed to Nadan his nephew, he fondly deemed in mind that the youth would bear in memory all his charges, and he knew not that the clean contrary thereof to him would become manifest. After this the older Minister sat in peace at home and committed to the younger all his moneys and his negro slaves and his concubines; his horses and camels, his flocks and herds, and all other such whereof he was seized. Also bidding and forbiddal were left in the youth's hand and he was promoted and preferred by the monarch like his maternal uncle and even more, while the ex-Wazir took his rest in retirement, nor was it his habit to visit the King save once after a while, when he would fare forth to salute him with the salam and forthwith return home.

But when Nadan made sure of all commandment being in his own hand, he jeered in public at his uncle and raised his nose at him and fell to blaming him whenever he made act of presence and would say, "Verily Haykar is in age and dotage and no more he knows one thing from other thing." Furthermore he fell to beating the negro slaves and the handmaidens, and to vending the steeds and dromedaries and applied him wilfully to waste all that appertained to his uncle who, when he saw this lack of pity for the chattels and the household, incontinently drove him ignominiously from his place. Moreover he sent to apprize the King thereof; to wit, that he would assuredly [30] resume all his belongings and provision; and his liege, summoning Nadan, said to him, "So long as Haykar, shall be in life, let none lord it over his household or meddle with his fortune."

On this wise the youth's hand was stayed from his uncle and from all his good and he ceased to go in to him and come out from him, and even to accost him with the salam. Presently Haykar repented of the pains and the trouble he had taken with Nadan and he became perplext exceedingly. Now the youth had a younger brother, named Naudan [31], so Haykar adopted him in lieu of the other and tendered him and honored him with highmost honor and committed to him all his possessions and created him comptroller of his household and of his affairs. But when the elder brother beheld what had betided him, he was seized with envy and jealousy and he fell to complaining before all who questioned him, deriding his benefactor; and he would say, "Verily my maternal uncle has driven me from his doors and has preferred my brother before me; but, an Almighty Allah empower me, I will indeed cast him into doom of death."

Hereat he fell to brooding over the ruin of his relative, and after a long while he went, one day of the days, and wrote a letter to Akhyash Abná Sháh, [32] physician to the King of Persia and 'Ajam or Barbaria-land, and the following were its contents. "All salams that befit and greetings that are meet from part of Sankharib, King of Assyria and Niniveh, and from his Wazir and Secretary Haykar unto you, O glorious monarch, and salutations be between me and you. And forthright, when this missive shall have reached you, do you arise in haste and come to meet me and let our trysting-place be the Buk'at Nisrín, the Lowland of the Eglantine [33] of Assyria and Niniveh, that I may commit to you the kingdom without fight or fray." Furthermore he wrote a second letter in Haykar's name to Pharaoh, [34] lord of Misraim, [35] with this purport: [36]—"Greetings between me and you, O mighty potentate; and do you straightway, on receipt of this epistle, arise and march upon the Buk'at Nisrin to the end that I make over to you the kingdom without battle or slaughter."

Now Nadan's handwriting was the likest to that of his mother's brother. Then he folded the two missives and sealed them with Haykar's signet and cast them into the royal palace, after which he went and indited a letter in the King's name to his uncle, saying.—"All salutations to my Wazir and Secretary and Concealer of my secret, Haykar; and do you immediately on receipt of this present levy your host and all that be under you with arms and armour complete, and march them to meet me on fifth-day [37] at the Buk'at Nisrin. Moreover, when you see me approach you make your many prepare for mimic onset as they were my adversaries and offer me sham fight; for that messengers from Pharaoh, King of Egypt, have been sent to espy the strength of our armies. Accordingly, let them stand in fear of us, for that they be our foes and our haters." Presently, sealing this epistle, he sent it to Haykar by one of the royal pages and himself carrying the other letters he had addressed to the Persian and the Egyptian, he laid them before the King and read them aloud and showed their seals. But when Sankharib heard their contents he marvelled with mighty great marvel and raged with exceeding rage and cried out, saying, "What is it I have done unto Haykar that he should write such a writ to mine adversaries? Is this my reward for all the benefits I have lavished upon Haykar?"

The other replied, "Be not grieved, O King, and sorrow not, nor be you an-angered: rather let us fare on the morrow to the Buk'at Nisrin and look into the matter, whether it be fact or falsehood." So when Thursday came, Nadan arose, and taking the King and his Wazirs and army-officers marched them over the wastes to the Lowland of the Eglantine, and arrived there Sankharib, the Sovran, looked upon Haykar and saw his host aligned in battle against himself. And when the ex-Minister beheld his King approaching, he bade his host stir for battle and prepare to smite the opposing ranks; to wit, those of his liege lord, even as he had been commanded by royal rescript, nor did he know what manner of pit had been digged for him by Nadan. But seeing this sight the monarch was agitated and consterned and raged with mighty great wrath. Then said Nadan, "See you, O King, what this sorry fellow has done? But chafe not, neither be you sorrowful, but rather do you retire to your palace, where I will presently bring to you Haykar pinioned and bearing chains; and I will readily and without trouble fend off from you your foe." So when Sankharib hied him home in sore anger with that which his ancient Minister had done, Nadan went to his uncle and said, "Indeed the King has rejoiced with exceeding joy, and thanks you for acting as he bade you, and now he has despatched me to order that your men be bidden to wend their ways, and that you present yourself before him pinioned and fettered to the end that you be seen in such plight of the envoys sent by Pharaoh concerning whom and whose master our Monarch stands in fear." "To hear is to obey!" replied Haykar, and forthwith let pinion his arms and fetter his legs; then, taking with him Nadan, his nephew, he repaired to the presence, where he found the King perusing the other forged letter also sealed with the ministerial signet.

When he entered the throne-room he prostrated himself, falling to the ground upon his face, and the Sovran said to him, "O Haykar, my Viceregent and Secretary and Concealer of my secret and Councillor of my kingdom, tell me, what have I wrought you of wrong that you should requite me with such hideous deed?" So saying he showed him the two papers written in the handwriting and sealed with the seal of the accused who, when he looked upon them, trembled in every limb, and his tongue was knotted for a while, nor could he find power to speak a word, and he was bereft of all his reason and of his knowledge. Wherefor he bowed his brow groundwards and held his peace. But when the King beheld this his condition, he bade them slay him by smiting his neck without the city, and Nadan cried aloud, "O Haykar, O blackavice, what could have profited you such trick and treason that you do a deed like this by your King?" [38]

Now the name of the Sworder was Abú Sumayk the Pauper, [39] and the monarch bade him strike the neck of Haykar in front of the Minister's house-door and place his head at a distance of an hundred ells from his body. [40] Hearing this Haykar fell prone before the King and cried, "Live thou, O my lord the King, for ever and aye! If you desire my death be it as you will and well I know that I am not in default and that the evil-doer exacts according to his ill-nature. [41] Yet I hope from my lord the King and from his benevolence that he suffer the Sworder make over my corpse to my menials for burial, and so shall your slave be your sacrifice." Hereat the Monarch commanded the Headsman do as he was desired, and the man, accompanied by the royal pages, took Haykar, whom they had stripped of his outer raiment, and led him away to execution. But when he was certified of coming death, he sent tidings thereof to his wife, named Shaghaftíní [42], adding, "Do you immediately come forth to meet me escorted by a thousand maiden girls, whom you shall habit in escarlate and sendal, that they may keen over me before I perish; moreover dispread for the Headsman and his varlets a table of food and bring an abundance of good wine that they may drink and make merry." [43]

Haykar's wife presently obeyed his orders for she also was ware and wise, sharp-witted, experienced and a compendium of accomplishments and knowledge. Now when the guards [44] and the Sworder and his varlets came to Haykar's door, they found the tables laid out with wine and sumptuous viands; so they fell to eating and drinking till they had their sufficiency and returned thanks to the housemaster. [45] Thereupon Haykar led the Headsman aside into privacy and said to him, "O Abu Sumayk, [46] what while Sarhadun the King, sire of Sankharib the King, determined to slay you, I took you and hid you in a place unknown to any until the Sovran sent for you. Moreover I cooled his temper every day till he was pleased to summon you, and when at last I set you in his presence he rejoiced in you. Therefore do you likewise at this moment bear in mind the benefits I wrought you, and well I know that the King will repent him for my sake and will be angry with exceeding wrath for my slaughter, seeing that I be guiltless; so when you shall bring me alive before him your degree shall become of the highest. For know you that Nadan my nephew has betrayed me and devised for me this ill device; and I repeat that doubtless my lord will presently rue my ruin. Learn, too, that beneath the threshold of my mansion lies a souterrain whereof no man is ware: so do you conceal me therein with the connivance of my spouse Shaghaftini. Also I have in my prison a slave which merits doom of death: [47] so bring him forth and robe him in my robes; then bid the varlets (they being drunken with wine) do him die, nor shall they know whom they have slain. And lastly command them to remove his head a hundred cubits from his body and commit the corpse unto my chattels that they inter it. So shall you store up with me this rich treasure of goodly deeds."

Hereupon the Sworder did as he was bidden by his ancient benefactor, and he and his men repairing to the presence said, "Live your head, O King, for ever and aye!" [48] And after this Shaghaftini, the wife of Haykar, brought meat and drink to her husband down in the Matamor, [49] and every Friday she would provide him with a sufficiency for the following week without the knowledge of anyone. Presently the report was spread and published and bruited abroad throughout Assyria and Niniveh how Haykar the Sage had been done to die and slain by his Sovran; and the lieges of all those regions, one and all, keened [50] for him aloud and shed tears and said, "Alas for you, O Haykar, and alack for the loss of your lore and your knowledge! Woe be to us for you and for your experience! Where now remains to find your like? where now shall one intelligent, understanding and righteous of counsel resemble you and stand in your stead?"

Presently the King fell to regretting the fate of Haykar whereof repentance availed him nothing: so he summoned Nadan and said to him, "Fare forth and take with you all your friends to keen and make ceremonious wailings for your maternal uncle Haykar and mourn, according to custom, in honor of him and his memory." But Nadan, the fool, the ignorant, the hard of heart, going forth the presence to show sorrow at his uncle's house, would neither mourn nor weep nor keen; nay, in lieu thereof he gathered together lewd fellows and fornicators who fell to feasting and carousing. After this he took to himself the concubines and slaves belonging to his uncle, whom he would scourge and bastinado with painful beating; nor had he any shame before the wife of his adopted father who had treated him as her son; but solicited her sinfully to lie with him. On the other hand Haykar, who lay perdu in his Silo, ever praised Allah the Compassionate, [51] and returned thanks unto Him for saving his life and was constant in gratitude and instant in prayer and in humbling himself before God.

At times after due intervals the Sworder would call upon him to do him honor due and procure him pleasure, after which he would pray for his release and immediately depart. Now when the noise spread abroad over all the lands how that Haykar the Wise had been done to die, the rulers everywhere rejoiced, exulting in the distress of King Sankharib who sorely regretted the loss of his Sage. Presently, awaiting the fittest season, the Monarch of Misraim arose and wrote a writ to the Sovran of Assyria and Niniveh of the following tenor:—"After salams that befit and salutations that be meet and congratulations and veneration complete wherewith I fain distinguish my beloved brother Sankharib the King, I would have you know that I am about to build a bower in the air between firmament and terra firma; and I desire you on your part to send me a man which is wise, a tried and an experienced, that he may help me to edify the same: also that he make answer to all the problems and profound questions I shall propose, otherwise you shall deposit with me the taxes in kind [52] of Assyria and Niniveh and their money-tributes for three years." Then he made an end of his writ and, sealing it with his signet-ring, sent it to its destination.

But when the missive reached Sankharib, he took it and read it, he and his Wazirs and the Lords of his land; and all stood perplext thereat and sore confounded; while the King waxed furious with excessive fury, and he was distraught as to what he should do and how he should act. Meanwhile, however, he gathered together all the Shaykhs and Elders and the Olema and doctors of law and the physicists and philosophers and the charmers [53] and the astrologers and all such persons which were in his realm, and he let read the epistle of Pharaoh in their presence. Then he asked them, saying, "Who among you shall repair to the court of Pharaoh, lord of Misraim, and reply to his interrogations?" But they cried, "O our lord the King, do you know there be no one who can loose the knot of these difficulties save only your Wazir Haykar; and now that none shall offer an answer save Nadan, the son of his sister, whom he has informed with all his subtilty and his science. Therefore, do you summon him and perhaps he shall unravel for you a tangled skein so hard to untwist."

Sankharib did as they advised, and when Nadan appeared in the presence said to him, "Look you upon this writ and comprehend its contents." But when the youth read it he said to the Sovran, "O my lord the King, leave alone this folk for they point to impossibilities: what man can base a bower upon air between heaven and earth?" As soon as King Sankharib heard these words of Nadan, he cried out with a mighty outcry and a violent; then, stepping down from his throne, he sat upon ashes [54] and fell to beweeping and bewailing the loss of Haykar and crying, "Alas, for me and woe worth the day for you, O Caretaker of my capital and Councillor of my kingdom! Where shall I find one like unto you, O Haykar? Harrow now for me, O Haykar, Oh Saviour of my secret and Manifester of my moot-points, where now shall I fare to find you? Woe is me for sake of you whom I slew and destroyed at the word of a silly boy! To him indeed who could bring Haykar before me or who could give me the glad tidings of Haykar being on life, I would give the half of my good; nay, the moiety of my realm. But whence can this come? Ah me, O Haykar; happy was he who looked upon you in life that he might take his sufficiency of your semblance and fortify himself [55] therefrom. Oh my sorrow for you to all time! Oh my regret and remorse for you and for slaying you in haste and for not delaying your death till I had considered the consequence of such misdeed." And the King persisted in weeping and wailing night and day on such wise.

But when the Sworder [56] beheld the passion of his lord and his yearning and his calling upon Haykar, he came to the presence and prostrated himself and said, "O my lord, bid your varlets strike off my head!" Said the Monarch, "Woe to you, what is your sin?" and said the Headsman, "O my lord, what slave ever contraries the command of his master let the same be slain, and I verily have broken your behest." The King continued, "Fie upon you, [57] O Abu Sumayk, in which have you gainsaid me?" and the other rejoined, "O my lord, you bade me slay the Sage Haykar; but well I knew that right soon indeed you would regret the death of him, and the more so for that he was a wronged man; accordingly I fared forth from you and hid him in a place unbeknown to any and I slew one of his slaves in his stead. And at this moment Haykar is alive and well; and if you bid me, I will bring him before you when, if you be so minded, do you put me to death, otherwise grant me immunity." Cried the King, "Fie upon you, O Abu Sumayk, how dare you at such time make mock of me, I being your lord?" but the Sworder replied, "By your life and the life of your head, O my lord, I swear that Haykar is alive and in good case!"

Now when the Monarch heard these words from the Sworder and was certified by him of the matter, he flew for very gladness and he was like to fall a-swoon for the violence of his joy. So he bade immediately Haykar be brought to him and exclaimed to the Sworder, "O you righteous slave if these your words are true, I am resolved to enrich you and raise your degree among all my companions;" and so saying and rejoicing mightily he commanded the Sworder set Haykar in the presence. The man fared to the Minister's house forthright, and opening the souterrain went downstairs to the tenant whom he found sitting and praising Allah and rendering to Him thanksgivings; so he cried out and said, "O Haykar, the blessedest of bliss has come to you, and do you go forth and gladden your heart!" Haykar replied, "And what is to do?" whereat the man told him the whole tale, first and last, of what had befallen his lord at the hands of Pharaoh; then, taking him, led him to the presence.

But when Sankharib considered him, he found him as one clean wasted by want; his hair had grown long like the pelts of wild beasts and his nails were as vulture's claws and his members were meagre for the length of time spent by him in duresse and darkness, and the dust had settled upon him and changed his color which had faded and waxed of ashen hue. So his lord mourned for his plight and, rising up in honor, kissed him and embraced him and wept over him saying, "Alhamdolillah—laud to the Lord—who has restored you to me on life after death!" Then he fell to soothing his sorrows and consoled him, praying pardon of him the while; and after bestowing robes of honor upon the Sworder and giving him due guerdon and lavishing upon him abundant good, he busied himself about the recovery of Haykar, who said, "O my lord the King, may your head live for ever and aye! All this wrong which befell me is the work of the adulterines, and I reared me a palm-tree against which I might prop me, but it bent and brought me to the ground: now, however, O my lord and master, that you have deigned summon me before you, may all passion pass away and dolour depart from you!"

"Blessed and exalted be Allah," rejoined Sankharib, "who has had pity upon you, and who, seeing and knowing you to be a wronged man, has saved you and preserved you from slaughter. [58] Now, however, do you repair to the Hammam and let shave your head and pare your nails and change your clothes; after which sit at home in ease for forty days' space that your health be restored and your condition be righted and the hue of health return to your face; and then (but not till then) do you appear before me." Hereupon the King invested him with sumptuous robes, and Haykar, having offered thanks to his liege lord, fared homewards in joyaunce and gladness frequently ejaculating, "Subhána 'llahu ta'álá?God Almighty be glorified!" and right happy were his household and his friends and all who had learned that he was still alive. Then did he as the King had bidden him and enoyed his rest for two-score days, after which he donned his finest dress and took horse, followed and preceded by his slaves, all happy and exulting, and rode to Court, while Nadan the nephew, seeing what had befallen, was seized with sore fear and affright and became perplexed and unknowing what to do. Now, when Haykar went in and salamed to the King, his lord seated him by his side and said, "O my beloved Haykar, look upon this writ which was sent to me by the King of Misraim after hearing of your execution; and in very deed they, to wit he and his, have conquered and chastised and routed most of the folk of our realm, compelling them to fly for refuge Egyptwards in fear of the tax-tribute which they have demanded of us." So the Minister took the missive and, after reading and comprehending the sum of its contents, said he to the King, "Be not wroth, O my lord: I will repair in person to Egypt and will return a full and sufficient reply to Pharaoh, and I will explain to him his propositions and will bring you from him all the tax-tribute he demands of you: moreover, I will restore all the lieges he has caused fly this country and I will humiliate every foe of you by aidance of Almighty Allah and by the blessings of your Majesty."

Now when the Sovran heard this answer, he rejoiced and his heart was gladdened; whereupon he gifted Haykar with a generous hand and once more gave immense wealth to the Sworder. Presently the Minister said, "Grant me a delay of forty days that I ponder this matter and devise a sufficient device." As soon as Sankharib granted him the required permission he returned homewards and, summoning his huntsmen, bade them catch for him two vigorous young vultures; [59] and, when these were brought, he sent for those who twist ropes and commanded them make two cords of cotton each measuring two thousand ells. He also bade bring him carpenters and ordered them to build for him two coffers of large size, and as soon as his bidding was done he chose out two little lads, one named Binúhál and the other Tabshálím. [60] Then every day he would let slaughter a pair of lambs and with it feed the children and the vultures, and he mounted those upon the back of these, binding them tight, and also making fast the cords to the legs of the fowls. He would then allow the birds to rise little by little, prolonging the flight every day to the extent of ten cubits, the better to teach and to train them; and they learnt their task so well that in a short time they would rise to the full length of the tethers till they soared in the fields of air with the boys on their backs, after which he would let hale them down. And when he saw them perfect in this process, he taught the lads to utter loud shouts what while they reached the full length of the cords and to cry out, "Send us stones and mud [61] and slaked lime that we may build a bower for King Pharaoh, inasmuch as we now stand here all the day idle!"

And Haykar ceased not to accustom them and to instruct them until they became dexterous in such doings as they could be. Then he quitted them and presenting himself before King Sankharib said, "O my lord, the work is completed even as you could desire; but do you arise and come with me that I may show you the marvel." Thereupon the King and his courtiers accompanied Haykar to a wide open space outside the city where he sent for the vultures and the lads; and after binding the cords he loosed them to soar as high as the lanyards allowed in the firmament-plain, when they fell to outcrying as he had taught them. And lastly he haled them in and restored them to their steads. Hereat the King wondered, as did all his suite, with extreme wonderment, and kissing his Minister between his eyes, robed him in an honorable robe and said to him, "Go forth in safety, O my beloved, and boast of my realm, to the land of Egypt [62] and answer the propositions of Pharaoh and master him by the power of Almighty Allah;" and with these words farewelled him.

Accordingly Haykar took his troops and guards, together with the lads and the vultures, and he fared forth intending for Egypt where on arrival he at once made for the royal Palace. And when the folk of the capital understood that Sankharib the King had commissioned a man of his notables to bespeak their Sovran the Pharaoh, they entered and apprized their liege lord who sent a party of his familiars summoning him to the presence. Presently Haykar the Sage entered unto Pharaoh; and after prostration as befits before royalty said, "O my lord, Sankharib the King greets you with many salutations and salams; and has sent me singlehanded without other of his slaves, to the end that I answer your question and fulfil whatever you require and I am commanded to supply everything you need; especially inasmuch as you have sent to the Monarch my master for the loan of a man who can build you a bower between firmament and terra firma; and I, by the good aidance of Allah Almighty and of your august magnanimity, will edify that same for you even as you desire and require. But this shall be upon the condition established concerning the tax-tribute of Misraim for three years, seeing that the consent of the Kings is their fullest securities. If you vanquish me and my hand falls short and I fail to answer you, then shall my liege lord send you the tax-tribute whereof you speak; but if I bring you all you need, then shall you forward to my lord the tax-tribute you have mentioned and of him demanded."

Pharaoh, hearing these words, marvelled and was perplexed at the eloquence of his tongue and the sweetness of his speech and presently exclaimed, "O man, what may be your name?" The other replied, "Your slave is named Abíkám; [63] and I am one of the ants under Sankharib the King." Asked Pharaoh, "Had not your lord one more dignified of degree than you, that he sent to me an ant to answer me and converse with me?" and Haykar answered, "I humbly hope of the Almighty that I may satisfy all which is in your heart, O my lord; for that Allah is with the weakling the more to astounding the strangling." Hereat Pharaoh gave orders to set apart for Abikam his guest an apartment, also for the guards and all that were with him and provide them with rations and fodder of meat and drink, and whatever was appropriate to their reception as properest might be. And after the usual three days of guest-rite [64] the King of Egypt donned his robes of brightest escarlate; and, having taken seat upon his throne, each and every Grandee and Wazir (who were habited in the same hue) standing with crossed arms and feet joined, [65] he sent a summons to produce before him Haykar, now Abikam called. Accordingly he entered and prostrated in the King's presence and stood up to receive the royal behest, when Pharaoh after a long delay asked him, "O Abikam, whom do I resemble and what may these my Lords and Ministers represent?"

Hereto the envoy answered saying, "O my lord, you favour Bel the idol [66] and your chief-cains favour the servitors thereof!" Then said the King, "Now do you depart and I desire you on the morrow come again." Accordingly Abikam, which was Haykar, retired as he was ordered, and on the next day he presented himself before Pharaoh and after prostrating stood between his hands. The King was habited in a red coat of various tints and his mighty men were garbed in white, and presently he enquired saying, "O Abikam, whom do I resemble and what may these my Lords and Ministers represent?" He replied, "O my lord, you are like unto the sun and your nobles are like the rays thereof!" Then said the King, "Do you retire to your quarters and tomorrow come hither again." So the other fared forth and Pharaoh commanded and charged his head men to don pure white, himself doing the same; and, having taken seat upon his throne, he bade Abikam be brought into the presence and when he appeared asked him, "Whom do I resemble, and what may these my Grandees represent?" He replied, "O my lord, you favour the moon and your servitors and guards favour the stars and planets and constellations."

Then said the King, "Go you until the morrow when do you come hither again;" after which he commanded his Magnates to don dresses of divers colors and different tints while he wore a robe of ruddy velvet. Then he seated him upon his throne and summoned Abikam, who entered the presence and prostrated and stood up before him. The King for a fourth time asked him, "O Abikam, whom do I resemble and what may these my guards represent?" and he answered, "O my lord, you are like the auspicious month Naysán, [67] and your guards and grandees are like the white chamomile [68] and his bloom." Hearing these words Pharaoh rejoiced with extreme joy and said, "O Abikam, you have compared me first with Bel the idol, secondly with the sun and thirdly with the moon and lastly with the auspicious month Naysan, and my lords with the chamomile and his flower. But tell me now unto what liken you Sankharib your lord, and what favour his Grandees?" Haykar made answer, "Heaven forfend I mention my liege lord the while you sit on your throne; but rise to your feet, and I will inform you what my Master represent and what his court most resemble."

Pharaoh, struck with astonishment at such heat of tongue and valiancy of speech, arose from his seat and stood facing Haykar and presently said, "Now tell me that I may learn what your lord resembles and what his Grandees represent." The other made reply, "My lord resembles the God of Heaven, and his lords represent the Lightning and Thunder. If it is his will the winds do blow and the rains do fall; and, when he deign order, the leven plays and the thunder roars and at his behest the sun would refuse light and the moon and stars stand still in their several courses. But he may also command the storm-wind to arise and downpours to deluge when Naysan would be as one who beats the bough [69] and who scatters abroad the blooms of the chamomile." Pharaoh hearing these words wondered with extreme wonderment, then raging with excessive rage he cried, "O man, tell me the real truth and let me know who you are in very sooth." "I am Haykar," said the other, "Chief Secretary and especial to Sankharib the King; also his Wazir and Councillor of his kingdom and Keeper of his secret." "You state fact, O Sage," said Pharaoh, "and this your say is veridical: yet have we heard that Haykar is dead indeed, although here you are alive and alert." The Minister replied, "Yea, verily that was the case, but Alhamdolillah—Glory to God, who knows all hidden things, my master had in very deed doomed me die believing the reports of certain traitors, but my Lord preserved me and well done to him who relies upon the Almighty!"

Then said Pharaoh, "Go forth and on the morrow do you return hither and tell me something no man has ever heard, nor I nor my Grandees nor any of the folk in my kingdom and my capital." Accordingly Haykar went home and penned a paper in which he said as follows: "From Sankharib, King of Assyria and Naynawah, to Pharaoh King of Misraim:—Peace be upon you, O my brother! As well you know, brother needs brother and the Kings require the aid of other Kings and my hope from you is that you will lend [70] me the loan of nine hundred-weight [71] of gold which I require to expend on the pay and allowances due to certain of my soldiery wherewith to provide for them the necessaries of life." After this he folded the writ and despatched it by a messenger on the next day to Pharaoh, who perused it and was perplext and exclaimed, "Verily and indeed never till now have I heard a saying like unto this at all, nor has anyone ever spoken [72] to me after such fashion!" Haykar replied, "'Tis fact, and 'tis well if you own you debtor of such sum to my lord the King." Pharaoh accepted this resolving of his proposition and said, "O Haykar, 'tis the like of you who suits the service of the Kings, and blessed be Allah who perfected you in wisdom and adorned you with philosophy [73] and knowledge. And now remains to us only one need of you; to wit, that you build us a bower between firmament and terra firma."

Haykar replied, "Hearkening and obeying! I will edify it for you just as you wish and you choose; but do you get ready for me gypsum lime and ashlar-stone and brick-clay and handicraftsmen, while I also bring architects and master masons and they shall erect for you whatever you require." So King Pharaoh gat ready all this and fared forth with his folk to a spacious plain outside the city where Haykar and his pages had carried the boys and the vultures; and with the Sovran went all the great men of his kingdom and his host in full tale that they might look upon the wonder which the Envoy of Assyria was about to work. But when they reached the place appointed, Haykar brought out of their boxes the vultures and making fast the lads to their backs bound the cords to the legs of the birds and let them loose, when they soared firmament-wards till they were poised between heaven and earth.

Hereat the lads fell to crying aloud, "Send up to us the stones and the mud and the slaked lime that we may build a bower for King Pharaoh, forasmuch as here we stand the whole day idle." At this were agitated all present, and they marvelled and became perplext; and not less wondered the King and the Grandees his lieges, while Haykar and his pages fell to buffeting the handicraftsmen and to shouting at the royal guards, saying, "Provide the workmen with that they want, nor hinder them from their work!" Whereupon cried Pharaoh, "O Haykar, are you Jinn-mad? Who is ever able to convey anything of these matters to so far a height?" But he replied to the King, "O my lord, how shall we build a bower in the lift on other wise? And were the King my master here he would have edified two such edifices in a single day."

Hearing this said Pharaoh to him, "Go you, O Haykar, to your quarters, and for the present take your rest, seeing that we have been admonished about the building of the bower; but come you to me on the morrow." Accordingly, Haykar fared to his lodging, and betimes on the next day presented himself before Pharaoh, who said to him, "O Haykar, what of the stallion of your lord which, when he neighs in Assyria and Nineveh, his voice is heard by our mares in this place so that they miscarry?" [74] Hereat Haykar left the King and faring to his place took a tabby-cat and tying her up fell to flogging her with a sore flogging until all the Egyptians heard her outcries and reported the matter to the Sovran. So Pharaoh sent to fetch him and asked, "O Haykar, for what cause did you scourge this cat and beat her with such beating, she being none other but a dumb beast?" [75] He replied, "O my lord the King, she has done by me a wrongous deed and she has amply merited this whipping and these stripes." The King asked, "And what may be this deed she did?" whereto Haykar made answer, "Verily my master Sankharib the King had given me a beautiful cock who had a mighty fine and mighty voice, and he knew the hours of darkness and announced them. But as he was in my mansion this mischief-making tabby fared there and fell upon him last night and tare off his head; and for this cause when she returned to me I took to punishing her with such blows and stripes." Pharaoh rejoined, "O Haykar, indeed I see you are old and doting! Between Misraim and Nineveh lie eight hundred and sixty parasangs; so how could this cat have covered them in one night and have torn off your chanticleer's head and have returned by morning to Egypt?" He replied, "O my lord, seeing that between Egypt and Assyria is such interval how then can the neighing of my lord the King's stallion reach unto Nile-land and be heard by your mares so that here they miscarry?"

When Pharaoh had pondered these words, he knew that the envoy had returned him a full and sufficient reply, so said he, "O Haykar, 'tis my desire that you make for me two ropes of sand;" and said the other, "Do you prescribe that they bring me a cord from your stores that I twist one like it." So when they had done as he bade, Haykar fared forth behind the palace and dug two round borings equal to the thickness of the cord; then he collected sand from the river-bed and placed it therein, so that when the sun arose and entered into the cylinder, the sand appeared in the sunlight like unto ropes. [76] Thereupon said he to Pharaoh, "Command your slaves take up these ropes and I will twist you as many of them as you will." Said Pharaoh, "O Haykar, we have before our eyes a millstone which is broken; and I require of you that you sew up the rent." Accordingly the Envoy looked about him and, seeing there another stone, said to Pharaoh, "O my lord, here am I a stranger man nor have I with me anything of darning-gear; but I would have you bid your confidants among the cobblers to provide me out of this other stone with shoemaker's awls and needles and scissors wherewith I may sew up for you the breach in yon millstone."

Hereat Pharaoh the King fell a-laughing, he and his Grandees, and cried, "Blessed be Allah, who has vouchsafed to you all this penetration and knowledge;" then, seeing that the Envoy had answered all his questions and had resolved his propositions he immediately confessed that he was conquered and he bade them collect the tax-tribute of three years and present it to him together with the loan concerning which Haykar had written and he robed him with robes of honor, him and his guards and his pages; and supplied him with provisions, victual and moneys for the road, and said to him, "Fare you in safety, O honor of your lord and boast of your liege: who like unto you shall be found as a Councillor for the Kings and the Sultans? And do you present my salam to your master Sankharib the Sovran saying, 'Excuse us for that which we forwarded to you, as the Kings are satisfied with a scanting of such acknowledgment.'" [77] Haykar accepted from him all this; then, kissing ground before him, said, "I desire of you, O my lord, an order that not a man of Assyria and Nineveh remain with you in the land of Egypt but fare forth it with me homewards."

Hereupon Pharaoh sent a herald to make proclamation of all whereof Haykar had spoken to him, after which the envoy farewelled the King and set out on his march intending for the realm of Assyria and Nineveh and bearing with him of treasures and moneys a mighty matter. When the tidings of his approach came to the ears of Sankharib, the King rode forth to meet his Minister, rejoicing in him with joy exceeding and received him lovingly and kissed him, and cried, "Well come and welcome and fair welcome to my sire and the glory of my realm and the vaunt of my kingdom: do you require of me whatever you want and choose, even did you covet one-half of my goods and of my government." The Minister replied, "Live, O King, forever; and if you would gift me bestow your boons upon Abu Sumayk, the Sworder, whose wise delay, furthered by the will of Allah Almighty, quickened me with a second life."

"In your honor, O my beloved," said the King, "I will do him honor;" and presently he fell to questioning his envoy concerning what had befallen him from Pharaoh and how the Lord of the Misraim had presented him with the tax-tribute and moneys and gifts and honorable robes; and lastly, he asked about the instances and secrets which ended the mission. So Haykar related all that had betided, whereat Sankharib rejoiced with mighty great joy; and, when the converse was concluded, the King said to him, "O Haykar, take unto you everything you wish and want of all this, for 'tis in the grasp of your hand." Haykar answered, "Live, O King, for ever and aye; nothing do I require save your safety and the permanency of your rule: what shall I do with moneys and such like? But if you deign largesse me with aught, make over to me in free gift Nadan, my sister's son, that I requite him for that he wrought with me: and I would that you grant me his blood and make it lawfully my very own."

Sankharib replied, "Take him, for I have given to you that same." So Haykar led his nephew to his home [78] and bound his hands in bonds and fettered his feet with heavy chains; then he beat him with a severe bastinado and a torturing upon his soles and calves, his back, his belly and his armpits; after which bashing he cast him into a black hole adjoining the jakes. He also made Binuhal guardian over him and bade him be supplied day by day with a scone of bread and a little water; and whenever the uncle went in to or came forth from the nephew he would revile Nadan and of his wisdom would say to him, "O my dear son, I wrought with you all manner of good and kindly works and you did return me therefor evil and treason and death. O my dear son, 'tis said in saws, 'Whoever hears not through his ears, through the nape of his neck shall he hear.'" [79]

Hereat said Nadan, "O my uncle, what reason have you to be angry with me?" and said Haykar, "For that I raised you to worship and honor and made you great after rearing you with the best of rearing and I educated you so you might become my heir in lore and contrivance and in worldly goods. But you sought my ruin and destruction and you desired for me doom of death; however, the Lord, knowing me to be a wronged man, delivered me from your mischief, for God heartens the broken heart and abases the envious and the vain-glorious. O my dear son, [80] you have been as the scorpion who when she strikes her sting [81] upon brass would pierce it. O my dear son, you have resembled the Sajálmah-bird [82] when netted in net who, when she cannot save herself alive, she prays the partridges to cast themselves into perdition with her. O my dear son, you have been as the cur who, when suffering cold enters the potter's house to warm himself at the kiln, and when warmed barks at the folk on such wise that they must beat him and cast him out, lest after barking he bite them. O my dear son, you have done even as the hog who entered the Hammam in company with the great; but after coming out he saw a stinking fosse a-flowing [83] and went and therein wallowed. O my dear son, you have become like the old and rank he-goat who when he goes in leads his friends and familiars to the slaughter-house and cannot by any means come off safe or with his own life or with their lives. O my dear son, a hand which works not neither ploughs, and although greedy and over-nimble shall be cut off from its armpit. O my dear son, you have imitated the tree whom men hew down, head and branch, when she said, 'Had not that in your hands been of me, [84] indeed you would not have availed to my felling.' O my dear son, you have acted as did the she-cat to whom they said, 'Renounce robbing that we make you collars of gold and feed you with sugar and almond cake!' But she replied, 'As for me, my craft is that of my father and my mother, nor can I ever forget it.' O my dear son, you are as a dragon mounted upon a bramble-bush, and the two a-middlemost a stream, which when the wolf saw he cried, 'A mischief on a mischief and let one more mischievous counsel the two of them.' O my dear son, with delicate food I fed you and you did not fodder me with the driest of bread; and of sugar and the finest wines I gave you to drink, while you grudged to me a cup of cold water. O my dear son, I taught you and tendered you with the tenderest of tending and made you grow like the lofty cedar of Lebanon, but you did incriminate me and confine me in fetters by your evil courses. [85] O my dear son, I nourished a hope that you would build me a strong tower in which I might find refuge from mine adversary and foil my foes; but you have been to me as a burier, a grave-digger, who would thrust me into the bowels of the earth: however, my Lord had mercy upon me. O my dear son, I willed you well and you rewarded me with ill-will and foul deed; wherefore, 'tis now my intent to pluck out your eyes and hack away your tongue and strike off your head with the sword-edge and then make you meat for the wolves; and so exact retaliation from your abominable actions."

Hereupon Nadan made answer and said to Haykar his uncle, "Do with me whatever your goodness would do and then condone you to me all my crimes, for who is there can offend like me and can condone like you? And now I pray you take me into your service and suffer me to slave in your house and groom your horses, even to sweeping away their dung, and herd your hogs; for verily I am the evil-doer and you are the beneficent; I am the sinner and you are the pardoner."

"O my dear son," rejoined Haykar, "You favour the tree which, albeit planted by the side of many waters, was barren of dates and her owner purposed to hew her down, when she said, 'Remove me unto another stead where if I fruit not then fell me.' But he rejoined, 'Being upon the water-edge you gave ne'er a date, so how shall you bear fruit being in other site?' O my dear son, better the senility of the eagle than the juvenility of the raven. O my dear son, they said to the wolf, 'Avoid the sheep lest perhaps the dust they raise in flight may do you a damage;' but Lupus made answer, 'Verily their dust is a powder good for the eyes.' O my dear son, they brought the wolf to school that he might learn to read; but, when said they to him, 'Say A, B, C, D,' [86] said he, 'Lamb, Sheep, Kid, Goat, [87] even as within my belly.' O my dear son, they set the ass's head beside a tray of meats, but he slipped down and fell to rolling upon his back, for his nature (like that of others) may never be changed. O my dear son, his say is established who said, 'When you have begotten a child assume him to be your son, and when you have reared a son assume him to be a slave.' [88] O my dear son, whoever does good, good shall be his lot; and whoever works evil, evil shall befall him; for that the Lord compensates mankind according to conduct. O my dear son, wherewith shall I bespeak you beyond this my speech? and verily Allah knows concealed things and all secret and hidden works and ways and He shall requite you and order and ordain between me and you and shall recompense you with that you deserve."

Now when Nadan heard these words from his uncle Haykar, his body began to swell and become like a blown-up bag and his members waxed puffy, his legs and calves and his sides were distended, then his belly split asunder and burst till his bowels gushed forth and his end (which was destruction) came upon him; so he perished and fared to Jahannam-fire and the dwelling-place dire. Even so it is said in books:—"Whoever digs for his brother a pit shall himself fall into it and whoever sets up a snare for his neighbour shall be snared therein." And this much know we about the Say of Haykar the Sage, and magnification be to Allah for ever and ever Amen. TMT. [89]


The History of Al-Bundukani, or, The Caliph Harun Al-Rashid and the Daughter of King Kisra


In the name of Allah the Compassionating, the Compassionate, we here indite, by the aid of the Almighty and His furtherance, the History of the Caliph Harun Al-Rashid and of the Daughter of Kisra the King. [90]

It is related (but Allah is all-knowing of His secrets and all-knowing in whatever has passed and preceded and preterlapsed of the annals of folk), [91] that the Caliph (by whom I mean Harun al-Rashid) was sitting on the throne of his kingdom one chance day of the days which happened to be the fête of 'Arafát. [92] And as he chanced to glance at Ja'afar the Barmaki, he said to him, "O Wazir, I desire to disguise myself and go down from my palace into the streets and wander about the highways of Baghdad that I may give alms to the mesquin and miserable and solace myself with a sight of the folk: so do you go with me nor let any know of our faring forth." "With love and good will," said Ja'afar.

So his lord arose and passed from the audience-room into the inner palace where the two donned disguise and made small their sleeves and breasts [93] and issued forth to circle about the thorough-fares of Baghdad and her market-streets, distributing charity to the poor and the paupers, until the last of the day. And while so doing, the Commander of the Faithful chanced to spy a woman seated at the head of a highway who had extended the hand of beggary, showing at the same time her wrist and crying, "Give me something for the sake of Allah Almighty!" Hereat he considered her nicely and saw that her palm and her wrist were like whitest crystal and yet more brilliant in brightness. So he wondered thereat, and presently pulling a dinar from his breast-pocket he handed it to Ja'afar and said, "Bestow it upon yonder woman." The Minister took the ducat and leaving his lord went up to her and placed it in her palm; and, when she closed her fingers thereupon, she felt that the coin was bigger than a copper or a silverling, so she looked thereat and saw that it was of gold. Hereupon she called after Ja'afar who had passed onwards, saying, "Ho, you fair youth!" and when he came back to her she continued, "The dinar wherewith you have gifted me, is it for Allah's sake or for other service?" Said he, "'Tis not from me, nay 'twas given by yonder Youth who sent it through me." "Ask him," she rejoined, "and tell me what may be his purport." Ja'afar went back to the Caliph and reported her words, whereat his lord commanded him, "Go back and say you to her 'tis for Almighty Allah's sake." The Minister did his master's bidding when she replied "His reward be upon the Almighty." Then the Wazir returned and reported the woman's prayer to the Commander of the Faithful, who cried, "Go to her and enquire if she is married or virginal; and, if she is unwedded, do you ask her if she is willing to wive with me." [94]

So Ja'afar fared to her and questioned her, whereat she answered, "A spinster." Said he, "The Youth who sent the dinar to you desires to mate with you;" and said she, "If he can pay me my dower and my money down, [95] I will become his bride." Hereat Ja'afar said in his thought, "whence can the Prince of True Believers find her dower and her money down? Doubtless we shall have to ask a loan for him;" [96] and presently he enquired of her what might be the amount of both. Replied she, "As for the pin-money, this shall be the annual revenue of Ispahán, and the income of Khorásán-city shall form the settlement." So Ja'afar wagged his head and going back to the Commander of the Faithful repeated her terms; wherewith Harun was satisfied and bespoke him, "Go to her and say, 'He has accepted this and you have professed yourself contented.'" Hearing his words she rejoined, "What is his worth, yonder man, and how may he attain unto such sum?" and he retorted, "Of a truth he is the Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid." When this reply reached her ears she veiled her hands and feet crying, "To Allah be laud and gratitude;" adding to Ja'afar, "If he is the Prince of True Believers, I am satisfied therewith."

Accordingly the Wazir returned to the Caliph and reported her consent, whereafter the two repaired homewards and the Caliph despatched to her a duenna and a train of handmaidens who went and bore her to the Hammam within the palace and bathed her. Then they brought her out and robed her in sumptuous raiment, such as becomes the women of the Kings, and ornaments and jewellery and what not: after which they led her to a fine apartment which was set apart and private for her in which also were meat and drink and furniture, arras [97] and curtains and all necessaries of such sort. In fine they fared to the Caliph and apprized him of what they had done and he presently gave command to summon the four Kazis who wrote her marriage-lines. When it was night he paid her the first visit and taking seat opposite her he asked, "Daughter of whom may you be among the folk that you demanded of me this dower?" "Allah advance in honor the Commander of the Faithful," answered she; "verily your hand-maid is of the seed of Kisrà Anushirwán; but the shifts of time and tide brought me down and low down." Replied he, "They relate that your ancestor, the Chosroë, wronged his lieges with mighty sore wronging;" [98] and she rejoined, "Wherefor and because of such tyranny over the folk has his seed come to beg their bread at the highway-heads." Said he, "They also make mention of him that in after-times he did justice to such degree that he decided causes between birds and beasts;" and said she, "Wherefor has Allah exalted his posterity from the highway-head and has made them Harím to the Prince of True Believers."

Hearing this the Caliph was angry with mighty great wrath [99] and swore that he would not go in unto her for full told year, and arising immediately went forth from her. But when the twelvemonth had passed and the fête-day of Arafat came round again, the Commander of the Faithful donned disguise and taking with him Ja'afar and Masrúr the Eunuch, strolled out to wander about the streets of Baghdad and her highways. And as they walked along, the Caliph looked about him and beheld a booth in which a man was turning out Katífah-cakes [100] and he was pleased to admire his dexterity to such degree that, returning to the Palace, he sent him one of his Eunuchs with the message, "The Prince of True Believers requires of you a hundred pancakes, and let each one of them, when filled and folded, fit into the hollow of a man's hand." So the Castrato went and gave the order as we have related and paid the price and, when the pastrycook had made his requirement, he carried it away to the presence.

Then the Caliph took seat and bade bring sugar and pistachios and all other such needs wherewith he fell to stuffing the pancakes with his own hands and placing in each and every a golden dinar. When this was done he despatched the same Eunuch to Kisra's daughter with the message, "This night the Commander of the Faithful proposes to visit you, the year of his oath having expired, and he sends to you saying, 'What is it your heart covets that he may forward it to you?'" The Castrato set forth upon this errand and received for all reply, "Tell him my heart desires nothing, for that all I require is with me nor is there anything of deficiency." Accordingly, he returned and repeated her words to the Caliph who bade him fare forth again to her and say the same to her a second time, when she, "Let him send me a thousand dinars and a duenna in whom he confides, so that I may disguise myself and go down with her and distribute gold to the mean and the mesquin." Presently back came the slave bearing this reply, whereat the Caliph ordered the moneys be sent to her and the woman required; and the two, Princess and duenna, went forth and threaded the lanes of Baghdad and her great thoroughfares while the young lady distributed her charity to the Fakirs and the paupers.

But when all the gold with her had been expended and nothing of it remained, they turned homewards making for the Palace; and, the day being sultry, drowsiness befell the young lady. So she said to her companion, "O mother mine, I am thirsty and want a draught of water to drink;" and said the other, "We will call aloud to the Water-carrier [101] who shall give you your need." Replied the Princess, "Drinking from the Waterman's jar will not be pleasant to my heart; nor will I touch it, for 'tis like the whore [102] whereinto some man goes every hour: let the draught of water be from a private house and suffer that it be given by way of kindness." Hereupon the old woman looked in front of her and saw a grand gateway with a door of sandal-wood over which a lamp hung by a silken cord [103] and a curtain was drawn across it and it had two benches of marble, the whole under the charge of a goodly concierge. Then said she, "From this house I will ask a drink for you." So the two women went forward and stood before the door and the duenna advancing rapped a light rap with the ring, when behold, the entrance was opened and came forth a young man in youthful favour fair and robed in raiments pure and rare and said, "'Tis well!" Hereat the governante addressed him, "O my son, indeed this my daughter is athirst and I crave of your kindness that you give her a draught of water, seeing that she will not drink from the Watercarrier." He replied, "With love and goodwill;" and going within brought out what was required and handed the cup to the old woman.

She took it and passed it on to her mistress and the young lady turning her face to the wall raised her veil and drank her sufficiency without showing a single feature. [104] After this she returned the cup to the old woman who took it and handed it back to the young man saying, "Allah requite you with all of weal, O my son!" whereto he replied, "Health to you and healing!" [105] And the two went their way and returned to the Palace and entered therein. On such wise fared it with these two but as regards the Caliph, when he had finished filling the pancakes, he ranged them in a large charger of porcelain; then, summoning the Eunuch he said to him, "Take up this and carry it to the daughter of Kisra and tell her, 'Here are the sweetmeats of peace,' and let her know that I will night with her this night." The Castrato did his lord's bidding; and carrying the charger to the Princess's apartment handed it to the duenna and delivered the message, whereupon she blessed and prayed for the Commander of the Faithful and the slave departed. Now he was angry and disappointed for that he could not eat one pancake of them all because they had become big by stuffing and he feared that if he touched any thereof its place would show void. Presently it so befell that the young lady said to the old woman, her governante, "Do you take up this charger and carry it to the youth who gave us the draught of water with the intent that he may not claim an obligation or have anything to desire of us."

Accordingly, the ancient dame took the charger and walked off with it. But on her way she longed for a Katifah and put forth her hand to one and took it up when she saw that it left in the line of pancakes a gap big as a man's palm. Hereat she feared to touch it and replaced it saying, "'Twill be known that I carried off one of them." Then after returning the pancake to its place she passed on with the charger to the door of that young man whom she suddenly sighted as he sat at the gateway. She saluted him with the salam which he returned, and then said she, "O my son, the young lady who drank the water has sent you all these cakes in acknowledgment for the draught you gave her to drain." Said he, "Set it down on the door-bench;" and when she did his bidding, he expressed his thanks to her and she departed. Now as the youth still sat there, the Watchman of the Ward suddenly stood before him blessing him and saying, "O my lord, this is Arafat-day and tonight will be the Eve of the 'I'd, or Greater Festival; so I hope from the beneficence of my master the Chamberlain and Emir Alaeddin (whom Allah Almighty keep and preserve!) that he will deign order me a largesse befitting the Fête wherewith I may buy sweetmeats for my wife and children." The other replied, "Take this charger and wend your ways therewith;" so the Watchman kissed his hand and carrying it off went home and showed it to his wife. But she cried, "O you miserable, [106] whence got you this charger: have you wilfully stolen it or suddenly snatched it?" [107] Replied her mate, "This be the property of the Emir Alaeddin, the Chamberlain (whom Allah preserve!), and he gave it to me as an alms-gift; so come hither all of you that we eat, for the pancakes look toothsome." Rejoined his wife, "Are you Jinn-mad? Up with you and sell the charger and cakes, for the worth must be some thirty to forty dirhams which we will lay out for the benefit of the little ones." He retorted, "O woman, suffer us eat of this food wherewith the Almighty would feed us;" but she fell to wailing and crying out, "We will not taste thereof while the children lack caps and slippers." [108] and she prevailed over him with her opinion, for indeed women are mostly the prevailers.

So taking up the charger he fared with it to the market-place and gave it for sale to a broker, and the man began crying, "Who will buy this charger with whatever is thereon?" Hereat up came the Shaykh of the Bazar who bid forty dirhams therefor, and a second merchant raised its price to eighty, when a third held it in hand and turning it about espied graven upon the edge, "Made by commandment of Harun al-Rashid, Commander of the Faithful." Hereat the trader's wits fled him and he cried to the broker, "Have you a will to work for my hanging in this matter of the charger?" Said the other, "What may be the meaning of these words?" and said the merchant, "This charger is the property of the Prince of True Believers." The broker, dying of dread, took the charger and repaired with it to the Palace of the Caliphate where he craved leave to enter; and, when this was accorded, he went in and kissed ground before the presence and blessed the Commander of the Faithful and lastly showed to him the charger.

But when the Caliph looked at it and considered it carefully, he recognised it with its contents and he waxed angry with exceeding wrath and said in himself, "When I make anything for the eating of my household, shall it be sent out and hawked about for sale?" adding to the broker, "Who gave you this charger?" "O my lord, 'twas the Watchman of one of the wards," replied he; and Harun rejoined, "Bring him to me hither." So they fared forth and fetched him bound in cords and saying in his mind, "The whore would not suffer us eat of that was in the charger and enjoy its sweetness, so this happened which has happened to us; we have eaten nothing and have fallen into misfortune." But when they set him between the hands of the Caliph the latter asked him, "Where had you yon charger? tell me the truth or I will smite your neck!" The Watchman answered, "Allah prolong the life of our liege lord! verily as regards this charger it was given to me by the Lord Alaeddin, the junior Chamberlain." Hereat the Prince of True Believers redoubled in rage and cried, "Bring me that Emir with his turband in tatters, and drag him along on his face and plunder his home." Accordingly the magnates fared forth with their pages; and, reaching the house, knocked at the door, when the owner came out and, seeing the officials, asked, "What is to do?" "'Tis against you," replied some of the Grandees, whereto the Chamberlain rejoined, "Hearkening and obeying Allah and then the Commander of the Faithful!" After this they bore him to the Palace of the Caliphate and an Emir of them put forth his hand to the Chamberlain's coat and tore it and rent his turband adown his neck saying, "O Alaeddin, [109] this is the behest of the Prince of True Believers who has enjoined that we do with you on such wise and we despoil your house: yet there is bread and salt between us albeit we must do as we are bidden, for obedience to royal behest is of the ways of good breeding." Then they carried him into the presence of the Caliph and he, after he was made to stand between the Sovran's hands, kissed ground and blessed Harun and said, "Allah give aidance to our liege lord and have him in His holy keeping: what may be the offence of your humble slave that he has merited such treatment as this?"

Harun raised his head and asked, "Tell me, know you yon fellow?" and the other looked and seeing the guardian of the gates corded and pinioned made answer, "Yes indeed, I know him and he is the Watchman of our ward." The Caliph resumed, "Whence came to you this charger?" and the Chamberlain replied, "Let the Commander of the Faithful (to whom Almighty Allah vouchsafe furtherance!) learn that I was sitting at home when there rapped a rap at the door; and I, going forth to open, beheld an ancient dame who said to me, 'O my son, this my daughter is athirst and I beg you of your bounty to give her a draught of water for she will not take drink from the public Sakká.' So I brought them out their requirement and they satisfied themselves and went their ways. After an hour or so I came forth and took seat by my house-door when behold, up came the old woman bearing in hand yon charger and said, 'O my son, the person to whom you supplied drink has sent this to you in requital for that you gave her of water inasmuch as she is unwilling to be under an obligation.' Said I, 'Set it down'; when she placed it upon the edge of the Mastabah-bench and left me. Thereupon suddenly came up this Watchman and craved from me the Sweetmeat of the Festival, whereto I answered, 'Do you take this charger and its contents' (whereof by the bye I had not tasted aught); and he did so and departed. This is all I know and—The Peace."

Now when the Commander of the Faithful heard this from the Chamberlain, his heart was gladdened and he enquired, "O Alaeddin, when the young lady drank the draught of water did you see her face or not?" and the Chamberlain replied in haste, "O Prince of True Believers, indeed I did see it." Hereat Harun was angry with exceeding wrath and bade summon the daughter of Kisra and when she came bade the two be beheaded saying, "You fare forth to do alms-deeds, and you dare display your features to this fellow when you drank water at his hand!" Hereat she turned her towards Alaeddin and replied, "You see my face! Nay, this is but a lie that may work my death." He rejoined, "The Reed-pen wrote what 'twas bidden write! [110] I designed to say, 'Verily I beheld nothing of her,' and my tongue ran as it did the sooner to end our appointed life-term." Then having set the two upon the rug of blood the Sworder bound their hands and tearing off a strip from their skirts bandaged their eyes, whereafter he walked around them and said, "By leave of the Commander of the Faithful;" and Harun cried, "Smite!" Then the Headsman paced around them a second time saying, "By leave of the Commander of the Faithful," and Harun again cried, "Smite!" But when the executioner did in like manner for the third and last time [111] said he to Alaeddin, "Have you perhaps in heart anything of regret or requirement that I may fulfil it to you? Ask of me anything save release, before the Commander of the Faithful say the word and immediately your head fall before your feet?" "I desire," said the Chamberlain, "that you unbind this bandage from mine eyes so may I look one latest look at the world and at my friends, after which do you work your will." The Sworder granted this and Alaeddin glanced first to the right where he saw none to aidance dight, and then to the left where he found all favour reft; and the spectators each and every hung their heads groundwards for awe of the Caliph, nor did any take upon himself to utter a kindly word. Whereupon the Chamberlain cried out his loudest saying, "A counsel, O Commander of the Faithful!" and Harun regarding him asked, "What is it you counsel?" "A respite of three days' space," rejoined the condemned, "when you shall see a marvel, indeed a miracle of miracles;" and the Caliph retorted, "After the third day, if I see not as you say, I will assuredly smite your neck;" and bade them bear him back to gaol.

But when the appointed term ended the Caliph sprang up and in his impatience to see what would befall him donned a dress distinctive of his new calling, [112] and thrusting his feet into coarse shoon and high of heel [113] and binding about his brows a honey-colored turband [114] he took in hand a pellet-bow [115] and slung its case over his shoulders: he also took gold in pouch and thus equipped he left the palace. Then, as he roamed about the lanes of Baghdad and her highways, giving alms and saying in his mind, "Haply may I sight the wonder which the Chamberlain Alaeddin announced to me," it befell about mid-forenoon (and he still walking) that behold, a man came forth from the Kaysaríyah [116] or chief mart of the merchants crying aloud, "This be a marvel, nay a miracle of miracles." So the Caliph questioned him saying "What is this wonder you have seen?" and he answered, "Within yon Kaysariyah is a woman who recites the Koran even as it was brought down, [117] and albeit she have not ceased declaiming from the hour of the dawn-prayer until this time, yet has none given her a single dirham: no, nor even one mite; [118] and what strangeness can be stranger than this I tell you?" The Caliph, hearing his words, entered the mart in which he descried an ancient dame sitting and reciting the Koran and she had well nigh reached the end thereof.

He was charmed with the beauty of her lecture and stood there until she had finished it and had blessed the by-standers, but when he glanced round he saw nobody give her anything. So he thrust his hand into his pouch saying in his mind, "Whatever [119] coin remains in purse shall go to this woman." And he designed to gift her with the gold when suddenly the old dame sprang from her seat and going to a merchant's shop took seat beside the man and said to him, "O my son, do you accept of a fair young lady?" Said he, "Yea, verily," and she continued, "Up with you and come that I show you a thing whose like you have never seen." Now when the Caliph heard her words he said to himself, "Look at yon foul old crone who plays bawd when I held her to be a devotee, a holy woman. Indeed I will not give her anything until I see what work is wrought by these two." The trader then followed the old woman to her home in which both, youth and crone, entered and the Caliph who pursued them also went in privily and took his station at a stead whence he could see without being seen. [120] Then lo and behold! the old trot called to her daughter who came forth from the bower in which she was, and the Caliph looking at this young lady owned that he had never sighted among his women anything fairer than this, a model of beauty and loveliness and brilliancy and perfect face and stature of symmetric grace. Her eyes were black and their sleepy lids and lashes were kohl'd with Babylonian witchery, and her eyebrows were as bows ready to shoot the shafts of her killing glances, and her nose was like unto the scymitar's edge, and her mouth for magical might resembled the signet-ring of Sulayman (upon whom be The Peace!), and her lips were carnelians twain, and her teeth union pearls and her mouth-dews sweeter than honey and more cooling than the limpid fount; with breasts strutting from her bosom in pomegranate-like rondure and waist delicate and hips of heavy weight, and stomach soft to the touch as sendal with plait upon plait, and she was one that excited the sprite and exalted man's sight even as said a certain poet in song of her like,

"Breeze-wavèd branch, full moon O' murk or sun of undurn sheeny
bright, * Which is she hight who all the three has might to
place in pauper plight, ah!

Where on the bending branch alight with grace of stature like to
hers * Tho' be the branch by Zephyr deckt and in its
ornaments bedight, ah!

And how can fellowèd be her brow with fullest moon that lights
the darks * When sun must borrow morning light from that
fair forehead dazzling bright, ah!

Were set in scales the fairest fair and balanced with a long
compare * heir boasts, you haddest over-weight for beauty
and their charms were light, ah!"

Now when he considered her straitly, she captured the whole of his heart. But the young lady had not upon her clothes enough for concealment, and here and there her body showed bare; so when she came forth and espied the young man standing by the old woman she withdrew into her bower and said to her mother, "Allah requite [121] you for that you have done. How can it be allowed you by the Almighty to set me in this state before a stranger?" "Hold your peace," said her parent; "man is allowed to look, and if he have any art or part in the object looked at 'tis well; but thereafter if he look without its being his lot, then 'twere unlawful. This youth has gazed upon you, and if he prove to have a portion in you let him take it, otherwise he may wend his ways, nor is there a flaw in anything of legal observance."

Hereat the Caliph's heart was cheered, for he knew that the ancient dame meant to marry the maid. Then the old mother said to the merchant, "Have you seen her?" and said he, "Yes." "Did she please you?" asked the crone, and he answered, "Yea verily," adding, "How much may be her actual marriage-settlement and her contingent dower?" She replied, "The first shall consist of four thousand dinars and the second shall be the same."' "This is overmuch," rejoined the youth, "and more than all my good; to wit, four thousand gold pieces, the gift of which will send me forth to beg; but do you take of me a thousand dinars, and upon me be the arraying of the house and the maiden's raiment for another thousand; so will I do business and trade with the remainder." But the crone swore to him by Allah the Almighty, [122] that if the four thousand failed of a single gold piece he should never see of the damsel a single hair. He replied, "I have no power thereto and—good day to both of you;" and he made for the door, but the Caliph forewent him to the street and standing in a corner suffered him to pass and depart. After this Harun went back to the old woman, and entering salam'd to her and she, returning his salutation, asked him, "What do you want and what may be your wish?" He answered, "The young trader who went forth hence sent me to say that he has no intent to wed," and she rejoined, "On this mind the man went away from us." Then said the Caliph, "I will marry the maid, and by me is all you can desire of gold and what not."

She retorted, "O Robber, [123] all I see upon you is not worth two hundred dirhams: whence then can you procure four thousand dinars?" Said he, "Have you grapes to sell, or wish you only to breed a quarrel between me and the vineyard-keeper?" [124] and said she, "Doubtless I have and hold the grapes." "Then, I possess all you can desire, said he, and said she, "Then, we will wed you when you shall have weighed out the gold." The Caliph cried, "I accept;" and then entering the lodging he took seat at the head of the chamber and in its place of honor, and said to the house-mistress, "Go you to Kází Such-an-one and tell him that Al-Bundukáni requires him." "O Robber," said she, "will the Kazi be content to come at your bidding?" The Commander of the Faithful laughed at these words and said, "Do you go without danger and bid him bring his ink-case and pens and paper." So she went off saying to herself, "Verily, if the Judge accompany me, this my son-in-law must be a Captain of Robbers." [125] But when at last she arrived at the Kazi's mansion she saw him sitting in the middle of the room and surrounded by doctors of divinity and a host of learned wights: so she feared to enter, and fell to looking in through the doorway and she dreaded to fare farther and stepped backwards; withal she kept saying, "How shall I go home without speaking a word to the Kazi?" and the thought would hearten her heart, so she would return to the entrance and thrust in her head and then withdraw it. On such wise she had done many a time when the Kazi, catching sight of her, bade one of his messengers bring her within; so the man went to her and said, "Bespeak the Kazi!"

So she went in full of fright and salam'd to the Judge who, returning her salutation, asked her, "What is your want, O woman?" She answered, "There is a young man in my house who desires that you come to him;" whereat he rejoined, "And who may be this youth that I in person should go to him; and what may be his name?" She replied, "He pretends to the name of Al-Bundukani—the Arbalestrier" (which was a by-name of the Caliph kept concealed from the folk but well known to all officials). Hereat the Kazi sprang to his feet without stay or delay and said to her, "O my lady, do you forego me," while all present asked him, "O our lord, where away?" and he, answering them, "A need has suddenly occurred," went forth. Then said the crone in her mind, "Hapless the Kazi who is a pleasant person, perhaps this son-in-law of mine has given him to drink of clotted gore [126] by night in some place or other and the poor man has yet a fear of him; otherwise what is the worth of this Robber that the Judge should go to his house?" When they reached the door, the Kazi bade the ancient dame precede him; [127] so she went in and called to him and he on entering saw the Caliph seated at the head of the chamber.

He would have kissed ground but Harun signed to him silence with a wink; so he made his salam and sat him down saying, "'Tis well, [128] O my lord, what may be your want?" The Prince of True Believers replied, "I desire you marry me to the daughter of this ancient dame, so do you write out the writ." Hereupon the Judge asked the assent of the old woman and of her daughter; and, when they both granted it, he enquired, "What may be the amount of the dower?" The mother replied, "Four thousand dinars of gold and the like sum in ready coin." "Do you accept?" said the Kazi to the Caliph, and said he, "Yes." Accordingly, the Judge wrote out the writ upon the skirt of his Farajiyah-robe for in his agitation he had forgotten to bring paper, and he set down the name of the Sovran and his father and his grandfather without question for that he knew them well; after which he enquired of the old woman her daughter's name [129] and that of her sire and grandsire. She wailed and cried, "Why and wherefore? [130] Oh miserable that we are! Had her father been living how would this Robber have availed to stand at our door, much less to marry her? but 'twas Death that did with us this deed." "Allah bless the wronged," [131] said the Kazi and busied himself with writing out the writ; but whatever question he put to the crone, she wailed in reply and buffeted her cheeks, while the Judge wagged his head and his heart was like to burst and the Caliph laughed long and loud.

And when the writ was written and finished, the writer cut off from the skirt of his gown according to the measure of the writing and gave it to Harun; then he rose up to fare forth but he was ashamed to wear a robe in rags, so he stripped it off and said to the old woman, "O my mother, present this to anyone deserving it." And so saying he left the house. Hereupon said the old woman to the Caliph, "Do you not pay unto the Kazi his fee for coming to you in person and writing the writ upon his robe which he was obliged to throw away?" "Let him go," said the Caliph, "I will not give him aught." Cried she, "And why? Oh, how greedy are these robbers! the man came to us in hopes of gain and we have stripped him instead of robing him." Harun laughed again, then he arose and said to her, "I now go home to fetch you the gold and the stuffs wherewith to clothe my bride," and the crone cried out, "Robber, whence shall you find cloth and coin? unhappy some one whom you design to seize and deprive of his daily bread and reduce to poverty and penury!"

The Commander of the Faithful held his peace and went forth intending for his Palace, where he donned the royal robes and taking seat upon his throne bade summon marble-cutters and carpenters and plasterers and house-painters. Then, as they came to the presence and kissed ground and blessed him and prayed for the permanence of his empire, he had them thrown and bade administer to them a bastinado of two hundred sticks a head. [132] And when they prayed for mercy and said to him, "O our lord, the Commander of the Faithful, what is our crime?" he said to the artizans, "The hall such-and-such in the Darb-al-Záji, [133] do you know it well?" They replied, "Yes," and he resumed, "I desire that you fare there immediately and you repair the walls with marble-slabs and should mid-afternoon come on and you leave unfinished a place as big as a man's palm, I will hack off your hands and place them in lieu thereof." "O Prince of True Believers," asked they, "how shall we do seeing that we have no marble?" [134] He answered, "Take it from the government stores [135] and collect each and every stone-cutter in Baghdad. But do you all bear in mind that, if the household enquire who sent you, you must reply, 'Your son-in-law;' and should they demand, 'What is his craft,' say, 'We know not;' and when they require to know his name declare it to be Al-Bundukani. And whoever of you shall speak anything beyond this him will I crucify."

So the master-mason went forth and gathered together the stone-cutters and took marble and ashlar from the stores and set the material on the backs of beasts with all other needs and he repaired to the hall, [136] and entered with his company. Hereat the old woman asked "What is't you want?" "We would slab the floors and walls of this dwelling with marble!" "And who was it sent you?" "Your son-in-law!" "And what may be his business?" "We know not." "Then what is his name?" "A1-Bundukani," they replied. So she said to herself, "He is nothing but a Robber and Captain of thieves." Then the masons divided and marked out the ground, and each found that each and every had to pave and slab a surface of a cubit or less.

Such was their case; but as concerns the Caliph, he turned to the chief Carpenter, and looking at him keenly said, "Go you likewise and assemble all your fellows in the capital: then do you repair to the dwelling of Such-a-one and make the doors and so forth, in fact everything needed of carpentry and joinery, taking you all the requisites from the public warehouses; nor let the afternoon come on before you shall have finished, and if all be not done I will strike your neck." He also charged them even as he had charged the marble-cutters never to divulge his dignity or even his name other than Al-Bundukani. So the chief Carpenter went and, gathering his craftsmen, took planks and nails and all his needs, after which they repaired to the lodging and entered, and setting up their scaffoldings [137] fell to work while the head man marked off a task for each hand. But the crone was consterned and cried to the men, "And why? Who has sent you?" "Thy son-in-law!" "And what may be his trade?" "We know not." "Then what may be his name?" "Al-Bundukani."

So they pushed on their work, each urging his fellow, while the old woman well-nigh waxed Jinn-mad, [138] and said to herself, "This my son-in-law, the Robber, is nothing save a viceroy of the Jánn; and all this is of their fear, so that none dares or deems it safe to disclose the craft or even the name of him, so much do they hold him in awe."

Lastly, the Caliph bade the plasterers and house-painters call a meeting of their brother-craftsmen and go to the government stores and thence take all their requirements of quicklime and hemp [139] and so forth; and lastly, charging them as he had charged the others who forewent them, he said, "As soon as the Izán of mid-afternoon prayer shall be cried, if any one of you shall have left in the lodging work unwrought, be it only the size of a man's palm, I will hack off his hand and set it upon the unfinished stead." Accordingly, they kissed ground and fared forth carrying with them all their requirements; and, repairing to the tenement, entered therein and slaked their lime and set up their ladders, and four or five artificers fell to working at every wall while the house-painters followed them. But when the ancient dame beheld this, her wits were wildered and she was utterly bedazed: so said she to her daughter, "This son-in-law of mine is none save one whose word is heard, and folk abide in awe of him; otherwise who could work all this work in a single day when none other than himself could have wrought the same within a twelve-month? But pity 'tis he is a Robber." Then she went to the plasterers and said, "Who was it sent you?" "Thy son-in-law!" "And what may be his trade?" "We know not." "Then what is his name?" "Al-Bundukani." After this she passed on to the house-painters and asked the same question and receiving the same reply, said she to one of them, "I demand of you, by God the Great, O my son, why you will not disclose to me concerning my son-in-law his name and his craft?" Thereupon said the fellow addressed, "No man has power to speak out, otherwise his life is lost;" and she repeated to herself, "Indeed he is none but a mighty Robber, for that the Moslems one and all dread him and his mischief." [140]

Now when mid-afternoon came, the artizans had done the whole of their work; so they donned their outer dresses and went forth intending for the Commander of the Faithful, Harun the Orthodox. And when they entered all kissed ground and said, "Under the good auspices of our lord the Prince of True Believers we have wrought the work of the house." So he bestowed robes of honor upon them and gave them gifts that contented them, after which they fared forth about their business. Then the Caliph summoned Hammáls or porters and set in their crates articles of furniture such as carpets and counterpanes and sofa-cushions and hangings of arras and prayer-rugs, besides gear of brass and all such necessaries for the household; and to this he added two baskets containing body-raiment and kimcob or gold cloth and stuffs inworked and studded with gems; also jewellery and precious stones, pearls and what not: nor did he forget a coffer containing the eight thousand pieces of gold. [141]

Then he sent them upon their errand, saying, "Take up all this and bear it to such a house in the Darb al-Zaji and make it over to the ancient dame who owns the hall; and when she asks, 'Who was it sent you?' do you answer, 'Your son-in-law;' and should she enquire, 'What is his craft?' respond, 'We know it not;' and should she demand the name, declare, 'Al-Bundukani.' Accordingly the porters fared forth, and reaching the tenement rapped at the door, when the old woman came out and cried, "Who knocks here?" and they replied "Open and take what we have brought of cloth and clothes and so forth." But when she looked upon the loads she wailed and cried, "Indeed you have wandered from the way: whence could all this prosperity have befallen us? return with it to the owner thereof." They asked her, "Is not this hall that which was builded this day?" And when she answered, "Yes," said they, "Then 'twas hither your son-in-law sent us." With these words they went in and set down whatever was with them, but the old woman wailed and cried aloud, "'Tis not for us: you have wandered from your way." "It is for you, indeed," they rejoined, "and your son-in-law says, 'Adorn your dwelling and don the stuffs and dress with it whomso you choose:' as for him, he has much business yet will he come to you what time the folk sleep." "Yes, indeed," said she to herself, "Robbers never do come save by night."

And when the Hammals went their ways the old woman fared forth to her neighbours and summoned them to assist her in ranging the furniture and vaiselle; [142] so they gathered together and entered; and, when they beheld what had befallen, their eyes were dazed and dazzled by seeing the restoration of the hall and by the stuffs and vases therein. So they asked her, "Whence came you by all this, and who set for you this dwelling in such condition and at what time? Yesterday 'twas a ruin and showed neither marble nor whitewash nor stencilling. Can it not be that we are sleeping and perhaps that we see a dream-house?" She replied, "No vision is this, but evidence of eye-sight: and what work you behold was wrought by my son-in-law during this one day and to-day also he sent me these stuffs and other matters whereon you look." "And who may be your son-in-law?" asked they, "and when did you wed your daughter while we knew nothing thereof?" Answered she, "To-day all this happened;" and they rejoined, "And what may be the bridegroom's calling? perhaps he is a mighty merchant or an Emir." "Nor merchant nor Emir," said she, "but a Robber and the Head and Captain of Bandits!" Hereat the women were startled and cried, "Allah upon you, do you charge him about us that he plunder not anything from our houses, seeing that we have a claim of neighbourhood and gossipry upon you." "Never fear," she replied, "he is not used to take anything of neighbours albeit he is a Viceregent of the Jann."

So their hearts were heartened, and they fell to ordering the furniture and decorations; and, when they had ended the ordinance of the house, they applied themselves to dressing the bride; and they brought her a tirewoman and robed her in the finest robes and raiment and prepared her and adorned her with the choicest ornaments. And while they did thus behold, up came other porters carrying crates of meat, such as pigeon-poults and poultry, Katás, [143] and quails, [144] lambs and butcher's meat, clarified butter and other cooking material, with all manner of edibles and delicacies such as sugar and Halwá-confections and the like thereof. The Hammals then said to the household, "'Take you this which your son-in-law has sent to you saying, 'Do you eat and feed your neighbours and whomso you please.'" Said the old woman, "I ask you, for Allah's sake, to let me know what may be my son-in-law's craft and his name;" and said they, "His name is Al-Bundukani, but what his business may be we know not;" and so saying they went their ways. Hereupon exclaimed certain of the women who were present, "By the Apostle, he is nothing but a robber;" while others who had claims upon the old housemistress cried, "Be whatever may be, before the man who can do after this fashion all the folk in Baghdad are helpless."

Presently they served the provision and all ate their sufficiency; then they removed the trays and set on others loaded with the confections which they also enjoyed; and at last after dividing the orts among the neighbours they reserved some of the best of meats and sweetmeats for the bridegroom's supper. In due time a report was bruited about the quarter that the old woman had wedded her daughter with a robber who had enriched them with what booty he had brought them. And these tidings spread from folk to folk till they reached the young merchant of whom mention has been made, the same who had sought the maiden to wife and who had not wedded her because refused by her mother. Also he was told that the damsel had been married to a robber who had rebuilt the hall with marble, and the plasterers and painters and carpenters and joiners had wrought therein works which astounded the beholders; moreover that the bridegroom had sent them of stuffs and jewellery a matter beyond count or compute.

Hearing this report he found the matter grievous on him and the fire of envy flamed in his heart and he said to himself, "Naught remains to me except that I wend me to the Wálí [145] and tempt him with promises and thereby work the ruin of this robber and take the damsel to myself." With these words he rose up without stay or delay and, going to the Chief of Police related to him all that occurred and promised him much money, saying, "Whatsoever you want can be had from this robber inasmuch as he owns good galore." The Wali rejoiced and replied, "Be patient until after supper-time when the thief shall have returned home and we will go and catch him and you shall carry away the young lady." So the trader blessed him and took himself off and waited at home until it was supper-time and the streets were void of folk. Presently Názúk [146] the Wali mounted horse with four hundred headsmen and smiters of the sword, link-boys and low fellows, [147] bearing cressets and paper-lanterns under four head constables and rode to the house of the old woman. Now all the gossips had departed to their abodes and were dispersed, nor did one of them remain behind; but the household had lighted wax candles and was expecting the bridegroom with bolted doors when behold, the Chief of Police came up and finding all shut bade his men knock with an easy rap.

This was heard by those within the hall and the ancient dame sprang up and went to the entrance, whence she espied gleams of light athwart the door-chinks and when she looked out of the window she saw the Wali and his merry men crowding the street till the way was cut. Now the Chief had a lieutenant named Shamámah [148], who was a meeting-place of ill manners and morals; for nothing was dearer to him save the straitening of a Moslem, nor was there upon his body a single hair which affected or aided the veiling of Allah. [149] Brief he was, even as the poet said,

"Whoreson and child of thousand pagans twain; * Son of the Road
to lasting sin and bane;
The Lord of Ruth ne'er grew him e'en a hair * Was not with this
or that of contact fain!" [150]

Now this man, who was standing beside the Chief of Police, seized the opportunity of saying, "O Emir, what boots our standing idle in this stead? Better 'twere that we break down the door and rush in upon them and snatch what we want and loot all the stuffs in the house." Hereat came forward another lieutenant who was called Hasan [151]—the Handsome—for that his face was fair and his works were fairer and he was a meeting-place of fairest deeds; and the same was wont to stand at the Wali's door as a symbol of pity to mankind. So he came forward and said, "O Emir, this were not the counsel which is right and yonder man's words lack good counsel, seeing that none has complained against this folk and we know not if the accused be a thief or not: furthermore we fear consequences for that perhaps this merchant speaks with an object, they having forbidden his marrying the girl: do not therefore cast yourself into that shall harm you, but rather let us enquire about the matter openly and publicly; and should it prove to be as reported, then the Emir's opinion shall prevail."

All this took place while the old woman heard from behind the door whatever they said. Hereat she dried up with dread and affright and going within acquainted her daughter with what had occurred and ended with, "The Wali still is standing at the door." The young lady was sore terrified and said to her mother, "Do you bar [152] the entrance till Allah perhaps deign bring us comfort." So the old woman fared forth and bolted and barred it yet more straitly; and when they knocked a second time she acknowledged the rap by "Who is at the door?" and the lieutenant Shamamah replied to her and said, "O ill-omened old woman, O accomplice of robbers, know you not that he who raps is the Master of Police and his young men? So open to us forthright." Said she, "We are Haríms and ne'er a man with us, therefore we will not open to any;" and said he, "Open, or we will break it down." The old woman made no reply but returning to her daughter within said to her, "Now look at this Robber and how from the first of this night we have been humbled for his sake: yet had he fallen into this trap his life had been taken, and would Heaven he may not come now and be made prisoner by them. Ah me! Were your father alive the Wali never had availed to take station at our house-door or the door of any other." "Such be our lot," replied the girl, and she went to the casement that she might espy what was doing.

This is how it fared with them; but as concerns the Caliph, when the folk had finished crowding the streets he disguised himself and taking in hand his pellet-bow and slinging his sword over his shoulder he went forth intending for his bride. But when reaching the head of the street he saw lanterns and stir of crowd: [153] so he approached to look and he espied the Wali and his men with the merchant standing by the Chief's side together with the lieutenants, all save one shouting, "Break down the door and rush in and seize the old woman: then let us question her with torture until she confess where be her Robber of a son-in-law."

But Hasan the fourth officer dissuaded them saying, "O good folk, do you fear Almighty Allah and be not over hasty, saving that hurry is of old Harry. These are all women without a man in the house; so startle them not; and peradventure the son-in-law you seek may be no thief and so we fall into an affair wherefrom we may not escape without trouble the most troublous." Thereupon Shamamah came up and cried out, "O Hasan, it ill becomes you to stand at the Wali's door: better 'twere for you to sit on the witness-bench; for none should be gate-keepers to a head policeman save they who have abandoned good deeds and who devour ordure [154] and who ape the evil practices of the populace."

All this and the Caliph overheard the fellow's words and said to himself, "'Tis well! I will indeed gladden you, O Accurst." Then he turned and espied a street which was no thoroughfare, and one of its houses at the upper end adjoined the tenement in which was his bride; so he went up to it and behold, its gateway showed a curtain drawn across and a lamp hung up and an Eunuch sitting upon the door-bench. Now this was the mansion of a certain noble who was lord over a thousand of his peers and his name was the Emir Yúnas: [155] he was an angry and violent man; and on the day when he had not bastinado'd some fellow he would not break his fast and loathed his meat for the stress of his ill-stomach. But when the Eunuch saw the Caliph he cried out at him and sprang up to strike him exclaiming, "Woe to you! are you Jinn-mad? where going?" But the Commander of the Faithful shouted at him saying, "Ho! you ill-omened slave!" and the chattel in his awe of the Caliphate fancied that the roar was of a lion about to rend him and he ran off and entered the presence of his owner quivering with terror. "Woe to you!" said his master; "what has befallen you?" and he, "O my lord, the while I was sitting at the gate suddenly a man passed up the street and entered the house-door; and, when I would have beaten him, he cried at me with a terrible voice saying, 'Ho, you ill-omened slave!' So I fled from him in affright and came hither to you."

Now when the Emir Yunas heard his words, he raged with such excessive rage that his soul was like to leave his body and he cried out saying, "Since the man addressed you as 'ill-omened slave,' and you are my chattel, I therefore am servile and of evil-omen. But indeed I will show him his solace!" He then sprang to his feet and took in hand a file-wrought mace [156] studded with fourteen spikes, wherewith had he smitten a hill he had shivered it; and then he went forth into the street muttering, "I, ill-omened!" [157] But the Caliph seeing him recognised him straitway and cried, "Yunas!" whereat the Emir knew him by his voice, and casting the mace from his hand kissed ground and said, "'Tis well, O Commander of the Faithful!" Harun replied, "Woe to you, dog! while you are the Chief of the Emirs shall this Wali, of men the meanest, come upon your neighbours and oppress them and terrify them (these being women and without a man in the house), and yet you hold your peace and sit in ease at home nor go out to him and eject him by the foulest of ejections?"

Presently the other replied, "O Prince of True Believers, but for the dread of you lest you say, 'This be the warder of the watch, why have you exceeded with him?' I would have made for him a night of the fulsomest, for him and for those with him. But if the Caliph command I will immediately break them all to bits nor leave among them a sound man; for what's the worth of this Wali and all his varlets?" "First admit us to your mansion," said the Commander of the Faithful; so they passed in and the housemaster would have seated his visitor for the guest-rite but he refused all offers and only said, "Come up with us to the terrace-roof." Accordingly they ascended and found that between it and the dwelling of the bride was but a narrow lane; whereupon said the Caliph, "O Yunas, I would find a place whence I can look down upon these women." "There is no other way," said the other, "save herefrom; and, if you desire, I will fetch you a ladder [158] and plant it in such wise that you can pass across." "Do so," rejoined the other, and the Emir bringing a ladder disposed it after bridge fashion that the Caliph crossed over the lane to the house on the other side.

Then said he, "Go sit you in your stead, and when I want you I will call." Yunas did as he was bidden and remained on the watch for his lord's summons. But the Prince of True Believers walked over the terrace-roof with the lightest tread and not audible, lest his footsteps frighten the inmates, till he came to the parapet [159] and looking down therefrom upon the hall he saw a site like the Garden of Paradise which had been newly pranked and painted, while the lighted wax-candles and candelabra showed the young lady, the bride, sitting upon her bedstead adorned with gems and jewellery. She was like a Sun shedding sheen in sky serene, or a full moon at the fullest seen, with brow flower-bright and eyes black and white and beauty-spots fresh as greenth to the sight; brief she was as one of whom the poet says,

"She's a wonder! her like none in universe see, * For beauty and
graces and softest blee:
That fairest of blossoms she blooms on earth * Than gardens the
sheeniest sheenier she:
And soft is the rose of her cheek to the touch * 'Twixt apple's
and Eglantine's lenity,
And the forelock-falls on the brow of her * Death-doom to the
World and the Faith decree;
And she shames the branchlet of Basil when * She paces the Garden
so fair and free.
An water doubted her soft sweet gait * She had glided with water
o'er greenery:
When she walketh the world like the Húr al-Ayn [160] * By the
tongue of looks to her friends say we:— 'O Seeker, an soughtest the heart of
me * Heart of other thou
never had sought for you:
O lover, an filled you my love you ne'er * 'Mid lovers hadst
dealt me such tyranny.
Praise Him who made her an idol for man * And glory to Him who to
her said 'BE'!'"

The Caliph was astonishment-struck at what he sighted of her beauty and loveliness while her mother stood before her saying, "O my child, how shall be our case with these tyrants, [161] especially we being women and without other recourse save Allah Almighty? Would Heaven I knew whence came to us this Robber who, had your sire been alive, would have been far from able to stand at the door. But this is the doom of Destiny upon us by God's will." Replied the young lady, "O mother mine, and how long will you put me to shame for this young man and call him 'Robber,' this whom the Almighty has made my portion; and perhaps had he been a good man and no thief he had been given to some other? [162] However he is my lot, and lauds to the Lord and gratitude for that He has bestowed and made my portion."

When the ancient dame heard these words she pursued, "I hope to Heaven, O my daughter, that your portion may not come here this night, otherwise sore I fear they will seize him and do him a harm and well-away for his lost youth!" All this took place between mother and daughter while the Caliph stood upon the terrace-roof listening to their say, and presently he picked up a pebble the size of a vetchling [163] and, setting it between his thumb and forefinger, jerked it at the wax candle which burned before the young lady and extinguished the light. "Who put out yon taper?" cried the old woman, "and left the others afire?" and so saying she rose and lighted it again. But Harun took aim at that same and jerking another pebble once more extinguished it and made her exclaim, "Ah me! what can have put out this also?" and when the quenching and quickening were repeated for the third time she cried with a loud voice saying, "Assuredly the air must have waxed very draughty and gusty; so whenever I light a candle the breeze blows it out." Hereat laughed the young lady and putting forth her hand to the taper would have lit it a third time when behold, her finger was struck by a pebble and her wits fled her head.

But as the mother turned towards the terrace-wall the first glance showed to her sight her son-in-law there sitting, so she cried to her daughter "O my child, behold your bridegroom whence he comes unto you, but robbers arrive not save by the roof, and had he not been a housebreaker he would have entered by the door. However Alhamdolillah that he has chosen the way of our terrace, otherwise they would have captured him;" presently adding, "Woe to you, O miserable, fly hence or the watch at the door shall seize you and we women shall not avail to release you after you fall into their hands; nor will any have pity upon you; nay, they will cut off at least one of your extremities. So save yourself and vanish so as not to lapse into the grip of the patrol." But hearing these her words he laughed and said to her, "Do you open to me the terrace-wicket that I come down to you and see how to act with these dogs and dog-sons." She replied, "Woe to you, O miserable, deem you these are like unto that poor Kazi who snipped his gown in fear of you: he who now stands at the door is Nazuk Wali and have you authority over him also?"

He repeated, "Open to me that I may come down, otherwise I will break in the door;" so she unbolted the terrace-wicket and he descended the stairs and entered the hall where he took seat beside his bride and said, "I am hungry; what have you by way of food?" The ancient dame cried, "And what food shall go down grateful to your stomach and pleasant when the police are at the door?" and he replied, "Bring me what you have and fear not." So she arose and served up to him whatever remained of meat and sweetmeat and he fell to morselling [164] them with mouthfuls and soothing them with soft words till they had their sufficiency of victual, after which she, the mother-in-law, removed the tray. Meanwhile the Chief of Police and his varlets stood shouting at the door and saying, "Open to us, otherwise we will break in." Presently said the Caliph to the old trot, "Take this seal-ring and go you forth to them and place it in the Wali's hands. If he ask you, 'Who is the owner of this signet?' answer thou, 'Here is he with me;' and if he enquire of you, 'What does he wish and what may he want?' do you reply, 'He requires a ladder of four rungs and its gear, not forgetting a bundle of rods; [165] also do you, O man, enter with four of your lieutenants and see what else he demands.'"

When the ancient dame heard this from him she exclaimed, "And does the Wali also dread you or fear this seal-ring? My only fear is that they may now seize me and throw me and beat me with a bastinado so painful that it will be the death of me, and they hearken not to a word of mine, nor suffer you to avail me aught." Rejoined the Caliph, "Be not alarmed, he shall not be able to gainsay my word;" and she, "If the Wali fear you and give ear to you, then will I gird my loins and suffer you to teach me something of your craft even were it that of robbing slaves' shoon." "Go forth without fright," said he laughing at her words, whereupon she took the seal-ring and went as far as behind the door and no farther, muttering to herself, "I will not open it wholly but only a little so as to give them the signet; then if they hearken to what says this Robber 'tis well, otherwise I will keep the bolt fastened as it was." Presently she went forward and addressed the watch saying, "What is it you want?" and Shamamah cried in reply, "O ill-omened old baggage, O rider of the jar, [166] O consorter of thieves, we want the robber who is in your house that we may take him and strike off his hand and his foot; and you shall see what we will do with you after that." She shrank from his words, but presently she heartened her heart and said to him, "Among you is there any who can read a whit?" "Yes," said the Wali, and she rejoined, "Take you this seal-ring and see what is graven thereupon and what may be its owner's name." "Almighty Allah curse him," cried the lieutenant Shamamah, presently adding to the Wali, "O Emir, as soon as the old crone shall come forth I will throw her and flog her with a sore flogging; then let us enter the door and slay her and harry the house and seize the robber; after which I will inspect the signet and find out its owner and who sends it; then, if this be one of whom we stand in shame we will say, 'Indeed we read not its graving before the command was somewhat rashly carried out.' On this wise none may avail to molest us or you."

Hereupon he drew near the door and cried to her, "Show me what you have, and perhaps the sending it may save you." So she opened one leaf of the door sufficient to thrust out her hand and gave him the ring which he took and passed to the Chief of Police. But when the Wali had considered and read the name engraved (which was that of the Commander of the Faithful, Harun the Orthodox), his color waxed wan and his limbs quaked with fear. "What is to do with you?" asked Shamamah, and the other answered, "Take and look!" The man took the ring in hand and coming forward to the light read what was on it and understood that it was the signet of the Vicar of Allah. So a colick [167] attacked his entrails and he would have spoken but he could stammer only "Bí, Bí, Bí" [168] whereupon said the Master of Police, "The rods of Allah are descending upon us, O accurst, O son of a sire accurst: all this is of your dirty dealing and your greed of gain: but do you address your creditor [169] and save yourself alive."

Hereat said Shamamah "O my lady, what do you require?" and said she to herself, "Indeed I am rejoiced for that they dread my son-in-law;" and presently she spoke aloud to him and said, "The lord of the seal-ring demands of you a ladder of four rungs, a bundle of rods and cords and a bag containing the required gear, [170] also that the Wali and his four lieutenants go within to him" He replied, "O my lady chief of this household, and where is he the owner of the signet?" "He is here seated in the hall," she replied and the Wali rejoined, "What was it he said to you?" She then repeated the command about the Wali and the men and the bag, whereat he asked again concerning the whereabouts of the signet-owner and declared the gear to be ready, while all of them bepiddled their bag-trousers with fear. [171]

Then the Wali and his four lieutenants, among whom was Shamamah the Accurst, entered the house, and the Caliph commanded lieutenant Hasan (knowing him for a kindly man of goodly ways and loath to injure his neighbour as proved by his opposing the harshness of Shamamah), saying, "Go you, O Hasan, and summon immediately Yunas the Emir of a thousand!" So this lord came in all haste [172] and was bidden to bastinado the Wali and Shamamah which he did with such good will that the nails fell from their toes; after which they were carried off and thrown into gaol. Then the Caliph largessed lieutenant Hasan; and, appointing him on the spot Chief of Police, dismissed the watch to their barracks. And when the street was cleared the old woman returning to the Harem said to her son-in-law, laughing the while, "There is none in this world to fellow you as the Prince of Robbers! The Wali dreads you and the Kazi dreads you and all dread you, while I gird my loins in your service and become a she-robber among the women even as you are a Robber among men, and indeed so says the old saw, 'The slave is fashioned of his lord's clay and the son after the features of his sire.' Had this Wali, at his first coming, let break down the door and had his men rushed in upon us and you not present, what would have been our case with them? But now to Allah be laud and gratitude!"

The Caliph hearing these words laughed, and taking seat beside his bride, who rejoiced in him, asked his mother-in-law, "Tell me, did ever see a Robber who bore him on this wise with the Wali and his men?" and answered she, "Never, by the life of you, but may Allah Almighty reprehend the Caliph for that he did by us and punish him for wronging us, otherwise who was it forwarded you to us, O Robber?" Said the Commander of the Faithful in his mind, "How have I wronged this ill-omened old woman that she curses me?" and presently he asked her, "And in which has the Caliph done you an injury?" She replied, "And what has the Caliph left us of livelihood and so forth when he marauded our mansion and seized all our seisins? Even this hall was part of the plunder and they laid it waste after taking from it all they could of marble and joinery and what-not; and they left us paupers, as you saw, without anything wherewith to veil us and nothing to eat. So had it not been that Almighty Allah favored us with yourself, O Robber, we had been of the destroyed by famine and so forth." "And wherefore did the Caliph plunder you?" asked he, "and what was the cause of his so doing?"

She answered, [173] "My son was a Chamberlain of the Commander of the Faithful, and one day as he was sitting in this our home two women asked him for a draught of water which he gave to them. Presently the elder brought him a porcelain charger full of pancakes with the tidings that it had been sent as a return gift from the young lady her companion who had drunk from his hand; and he replied, 'Set it down and wend your ways,' which she did. Presently as my son sat outside his door, the Watchman came up to offer blessings on the occasion of the Greater Festival and he gave him the charger and the man fared forth; but before an hour had sped, folk came who marauded our mansion, and seizing my son, carried him before the Caliph, who demanded of him how the charger had come to his hands. He told him what I have told you, and the Commander of the Faithful asked him, 'Tell me saw you anything of the charms of the young lady?' Now my son had on his lips to say No, but his tongue foreran him and he stammered out, 'Yes, I espied her face,' without really having seen her at all, for that when drinking she had turned to the wall. The Caliph hearing this hapless reply summoned the lady and bade smite both their necks, but in honor of the Festival-eve he had them carried off to prison. Such is then the reason of the wrong by the Caliph wrought, and except for this injustice and his seizure of my son, O Robber, it had been long before you had wedded my daughter."

When the Prince of True Believers heard the words of her, he said in his mind, "Verily I have oppressed these unhappiest" and he presently asked her, "What will you say if I cause the Caliph to free your son from gaol and robe him and return his fiefs to him and promote him in the Chamberlain's office and return him to you this very night?" Hereat the old woman laughed and made answer, "Hold your peace! This one is no Chief of Police that he fear you and you work on him whatever you will: this one is the Prince of True Believers Harun al-Rashid, whose behest is heard both in Orient and in Occident, the lord of hosts and armies, one at whose gate the lowest menial is higher in degree than the Wali. Be not therefore beguiled by whatever you have done, nor count the Caliph as one of these lest you cast yourself into doom of destruction, and there be an end of your affair, while we unfortunates abide without a man in the house, and my son fail of being righted by him who wronged him."

But when the Commander of the Faithful heard these words, his eyes brimmed with tears for pity of her; then, rising without stay or delay, he would have fared forth when the old woman and the young lady hung about his neck crying, "We adjure you, by Almighty Allah, that you draw back from this business, for that we fear greatly on your account." But he replied, "There is no help therefor," and he made oath that perforce he must go. Then he fared for the Palace of his kingship, and seating himself upon the throne bade summon the Emirs and Wazirs and Chamberlains, who flocked into the presence and kissed ground and prayed for him saying, "'Tis well, Inshallah! and what may be the reason for calling us together at this time of night?" Said he, "I have been pondering the affair of Alaeddin the Emir, the Chamberlain, how I seized him wrongfully and jailed him, yet among you all was not a single one to intercede for him or to cheer him with your companionship." They bussed ground and replied, "Verily we were awe-struck by the majesty of the Prince of True Believers; but now at this hour we implore of the Commander of the Faithful his mercy upon his slave and chattel;" and so saying, they bared their heads and kissing the floor did humble obeisance. He replied, "I have accepted [174] your intercession on his account, and I have vouchsafed to him pardon; so go to him and robe him with a sumptuous robe and bring him to me."

They did the bidding of their lord and led the youth to the presence where he kissed ground and prayed for the permanence of the Caliph's rule; and the Sovran accepting this clothed him in a coat whereon plates of gold were hammered [175] and binding round his head a turband of fine gauze with richly embroidered ends made him Chief Lord of the Right [176] and said to him, "Go you now to your home!" Accordingly he blessed the Prince and went forth accompanied by all the Emirs who rode their blood-steeds, and the Knights fared with him and escorted him in procession, with kettledrums and clarions, till they reached his mansion.

Here his mother and his sister heard the hubbub of the multitude and the crash of the kettledrums and were asking, "What is to do?" when the bearers of glad tidings forewent the folk and knocked at the door saying, "We require of you the sweetmeats of good news, for the Caliph has shown grace to Alaeddin the Chamberlain and has increased his fiefs besides making him Chief Lord of the Right." Hearing this they rejoiced with joy exceeding and gave to the messengers what satisfied them, and while they were thus, behold, Alaeddin the son of the house arrived and entered therein. His mother and sister sprang up and saluted him throwing their arms round his neck and weeping for stress of gladness. Presently he sat down and fell to recounting to them what had befallen him; but chancing to look around he saw that the house had changed condition and had been renovated; so he said "O my mother, the time of my absence has been short and when was this lodging made new?"

She replied, "O my son, on the day that you were seized, they plundered our abode even to tearing up the slabs and the doors, nor did they leave us anything worth a single dirham: indeed we passed three days without breaking our fast upon anything of victual." Hearing this from her said he, "But whence comes all this to you, these stuffs and vessels, and who was it rebuilded this house in a space so short? Or perhaps is all this I see in the land of dreams?" But said she, "Nay, 'tis no vision but an absolute reality and 'twas all done by my son-in-law in a single day." "And who may be my new brother-in-law?" he enquired, "and when did you give away my sister, and who married her without my leave?" [177] "Hold your peace, O my son," rejoined she, "but for him we had died of want and hunger!" "And what may be his calling?" the Emir asked, and she answered, "A Robber!" But when her son heard this he was like to choke with anger and he cried, "What degree has this robber that he become my brother-in-law? Now by the tomb of my forbears I will assuredly smite his neck." "Cast away from you such wild talk," cried she, "for the mischief of another is greater than your mischief, withal nothing thereof availed him [178] with a man who wrought all you seest in half a day."

Then she related to her son what had befallen the Kazi and the Wali from the man and how he had bastinado'd the police, showing him as he spoke the blood which had pored from their bodies upon the floor for excess of flogging; and she continued, "Presently I complained to him of my case, how the Commander of the Faithful had seized you and imprisoned you when he said to me, 'At this very moment I fare to the Caliph and cause him to free your son and suffer him to return home; also to robe him and to increase his fiefs;' whereupon he went from us and after an hour, lo and behold! you appeared; so but for him we had never seen you any more." When her son heard these words, his wits were bewildered and he was confounded at his case, so he asked her, "What may this man be styled and what may be his name?" She answered, "We are ignorant if he has any name or not, for however much we enquired of the marble-cutters and master artificers and handi-craftsmen, they told us only that his bye-name [179] is Al-Bundukani without letting us know any other. Moreover on like wise when he sent me to fetch the Kazi he bade me tell him that Al-Bundukani had summoned him."

Now when the Emir Alaeddin heard her name Al-Bundukani he knew that it was the Commander of the Faithful, nor could he prevent himself springing to his feet and kissing ground seven times; but as his mother beheld this she laughed and cried, "O you brawler, [180] 'tis as if he had met you in the street and had given you to drink a draught of clotted blood, one beyond the common! [181] What of your brave words when just now you said, 'I will smite his neck'?" "And do you know," said he, "who may be the person you so call?" and said she, "Who may he be?" "The Commander of the Faithful, the Caliph Harun al-Rashid in person," cried her son, "and what other could have done with the Kazi and the Wali and the rest what he did?"

When she heard these words, she dried up with dread and cried, "O my son, set me in a place of safety, [182] for he will suffer me no longer to cumber the face of earth by reason of my often speaking at him; nor did I ever cease to address him as 'Robber.'" Now while they were speaking behold, came up the Commander of the Faithful, whereat Alaeddin arose and kissed ground and blessed him, but the ancient dame took to flight and hid in a closet. The Caliph seated himself, then he looked around and, not seeing his mother-in-law, said to the Chamberlain, "And where may be your parent?" "She dreads," replied Alaeddin, 'and stands in awe of the Caliph's majesty;" but Harun rejoined, "There is no harm for her." Then he bade her be summoned whereat she appeared and kissed ground and prayed for the permanency of his kingship, and he said to her, "Erewhiles you gird your waist to aid me in stealing slaves' shoon and now you fly from your teacher?" She blushed for shame and exclaimed, "Pardon, O Commander of the Faithful," and Harun al-Rashid [183] replied, "May Allah pardon the Past."

Presently he sent for the Princess, the daughter of the Chosroë and, summoning the Kazi, immediately divorced her and gave her in marriage to Alaeddin, his Chamberlain. Hereupon were spread bride-feasts which gathered together all the Lords of the Empire and the Grandees of Baghdad, and tables and trays of food were laid out during three successive days for the mesquin and the miserable. The visit of entrance was paid by the two bridegrooms on a single night when both went in unto their wives and took their joy of them, and made perfect their lives with the liveliest enjoyment.

And ever after they passed the fairest of days till such time as came to them the Destroyer of delights and the Severer of societies and all passed away and died.

So praise be to the Ever-Living who dies not!

Such is the tale which came down to us
in completion and perfection,
and glory be to God, the
Lord of the three Worlds.
AMEN.

M.


The Linguist-Dame, the Duenna and the King's Son


We here begin, [184] with the aidance of Allah Almighty, and invite the History of the Tarjumánah [185] and the Kahramanah [186] and the young man, the King's son, and whatever happed between them of controversy and of contention and interrogation on various matters.

It is related (but Allah is All-knowing about what passed and preceded us of the histories belonging to bygone peoples) that there reigned in a city of Roum [187] a King of high degree and exalted dignity, a lord of power and puissance. But this Sovran was issue-less, so he ceased not to implore Allah Almighty that boon of babe might be vouchsafed to him, and presently the Lord had pity upon him and deigned grant him a man-child. He bade tend the young Prince with tenderest tending, and caused him to be taught every branch of knowledge, and the divine precepts of wisdom and morals and manners; nor did there remain anything of profitable learning in which the Youth was not instructed; and upon this education the King expended a mint of money.

Now after the Youth grew up Time rounded upon the Sovran his sire and his case was laid bare and he was perplext as to himself and he knew not whatever he should ever do. Presently his son took heart to direct him aright, and asked, "O my father, tell me, will you give ear to that wherewith I would bespeak you?" "Speak out," said the King, "that is with you of fair advice;" and said the youth, "Rise, O my sire, that we depart this city before any be aware of our wending; so shall we find rest and issue from the straits of indigence now closing around us. In this place there is no return of livelihood to us and poverty has emaciated us and we are set in the sorriest of conditions than which nothing can be sorrier." "O my child," said his sire in reply, "admirable is this advice wherewith you have advised us, O my son, pious and dutiful; and be the affair now upon Allah and upon you."

Hereupon the Youth got all ready and arising one night took his father and mother without any being cognisant; and the three, entrusting themselves to the care of Allah Almighty, wandered forth from home. And they ceased not wandering over the wilds and the wolds till at last they saw upon their way a large and mighty fine city; so they entered it and made for a place whereat they alighted. Presently the young Prince arose and went forth to stroll about the streets and take his solace; and while he walked about he asked concerning the city and who was its Sovran. They gave him tidings thereof saying, "This is the capital of a Sultan, equitable and high in honor among the Kings." Hereupon returning to his father and mother, said he to them, "I desire to sell you as slaves to this Sultan, [188] and what say you?" Said they, "We have committed our case to Almighty Allah and then to you, O our son; so do whatever you wish and judge good."

Hereat the Prince, repairing to the Palace, craved leave to enter to the King and, having obtained such permission, made his obeisance in the presence. Now when the Sultan looked upon him he saw that his visitor was of the sons of the great, so he asked him, "What is your need, Ho you the Youth?" and the other made answer, "O my lord, your slave is a merchant man and with me is a male captive, handy of handicraft, God-fearing and pious, and a pattern of honesty and honor in perfect degree: I have also a bondswoman goodly in graciousness and of civility complete in all you can command of bondswomen; these I desire to vend, O my lord, to your Highness, and if you would buy them of your servant they are between your hands and at your disposal, and we all three are your chattels."

When the King heard these pleasant words spoken by the Youth, he said to him, "And where are they? Bring them here that I behold them; and, if they are such as you inform me, I will bid them be bought of you!" Hereupon the Prince fared forth and informed his parents of this offer and said to them, "Rise up with me that I sell you and take from this Sultan your price wherewith I will pass into foreign parts and win me wealth enough to redeem and free you on my return hither. And the rest we will expend upon our case." "O our son," said they, "do with us whatever you wish." Anon, [189] the parents arose and prepared to accompany him and the Youth took them and led them into the presence of that Sultan where they made their obeisance, and the King at first sight of them marvelled with extreme marvel and said to them, "Are you two slaves to this young man?" Said they, "Yes, O our lord;" whereupon he turned to the Youth and asked him, "What is the price you require for these two?" "O my lord," replied he, "give me as the price of this man slave, a mare saddled and bridled and perfect in weapons and furniture; [190] and, as for this bondswoman, I desire you make over to me as her value, a suit of clothes, the choicest and completest."

Accordingly the Sultan bade pay him all his requirement, over and above which he largessed him with an hundred dinars; and the Youth, after obtaining his demand and receiving such tokens of the royal liberality, kissed the King's hands and farewelled his father and mother. Then he applied himself to travel, seeking prosperity from Allah and all unknowing where he should wend. And while he was faring upon his wayfare he was met by a horseman of the horsemen, [191] and they both exchanged salutations and welcomings, when the stranger was highly pleased at the politeness of the King's son and the elegance of his expressions.

Presently, pulling from his pocket a sealed letter wrapt in a kerchief he passed it over to the Youth, saying, "In very sooth, O my brother, affection for you has befallen my heart by reason of the goodliness of your manners and elegance of your address and the sweetness of your language; and now I desire to work your weal by means of this missive." "And what of welfare may that be?" asked the Prince, whereto the horseman answered, "Take with you this letter and forthwith upon arriving at the Court of the King where you are wending, hand to him this same; so shall you obtain from him gain abundant and mighty great good and you shall abide with him in degree of highmost honor. This paper (gifted to me by my teacher) has already brought me ample livelihood and prodigious profit, and I have bestowed it upon you by reason of your elegance and good breeding and your courteousness in showing me respect." Hereat the Youth, the son of the King, answered him, "Allah requite you with weal and grant you gain your wish;" and so saying accepted the letter of that horseman with honest heart and honorable intent, meditating in his mind, "Inshallah ta'ála—if it be the will of God the Greatest I shall have good fortune to my lot by the blessing of this epistle; then will I fare and set free my father and my mother."

So the Prince resumed his route and he exulted in himself especially at having secured the writ, by means whereof he was promised abundant weal. Presently, it chanced that he became thirsty with excessive thirst that waxed right sore upon him and he saw upon his path no water to drink; and by the tortures of thirst he was like to lose his life. So he turned round and looked at the mare he bestrode and found her covered with a foam of sweat wholly unlike her wonted way. Hereat dismounting he brought out the wrapper in which the letter was enrolled and loosing it he mopped up with it his animal's sweat and squeezing it into a cup he had by him drank it off and found to his joy that he was somewhat comforted. Then, of his extreme satisfaction with the letter, he said to himself, "Would Heaven I knew that which is within, and how the profit which the horseman promised should accrue to me therefrom. So let me open it and see its contents that my heart may be satisfied and my soul be joyed." Then he did as he devised and perused its purport and he mastered its meaning and the secret committed to it, which he found as follows, "O my lord, do you straightway on the arrival of him who bears these presents slay him, nor leave him one moment on life; because this Youth came to me and I entreated him with honor the highmost that could be of all honoring, as a return for which this traitor of the salt, this reprobate betrayed me in a daughter that was by me. I feared to do him dead lest I come to shame among the folk and endure disgrace, I and my tribe, wherefore I have forwarded him to your Highness that you may torture him with torments of varied art and end his affair and slaughter him, thus saving us from the shame which befell us at the hands of this reprobate traitor." [192]

Now when the young Prince read this writ and comprehended its contents, he suspected that it was not written concerning him and he took thought in himself, saying, "Would Heaven I knew what I can have done by this horseman who thus seeks diligently to destroy my life, for that this one had with him no daughter, he being alone and wending his way without any other save himself; and I made acquaintance with him nor passed there between us a word which was unworthy or unmeet. Now this affair must needs have one of two faces; to wit, the first, that such mishap really did happen to him from some youth who favours me and when he saw the likeness he gave me the letter; or, on the second count, this must be a trial and a test sent to me from Almighty Allah, and praise be to God the Great who inspired me to open this missive. At any rate I thank the Most Highest and laud Him for His warding off the distress and calamity descending upon me and wherefrom He delivered me."

Then the young Prince ceased not wending over the wildest of wolds until he came to a mighty grand city which he entered; and, hiring himself a lodging in a Khan, [193] dismounted thereat; then, having tethered his mare and fed her with a sufficiency of fodder, he fared forth to walk about the thoroughfares. Suddenly he was met by an ancient dame who considered him and noted him for a handsome and elegant youth, tall of stature and with the signs of prosperity showing manifest between his eyes. Hereat he accosted her and questioned her of the city folk and their circumstances, whereto the old woman made reply with the following purport, "Here in our city reigns a King of exalted dignity and he has a daughter fair of favour, indeed the loveliest of the folk of her time. Now she has taken upon herself never to intermarry with any of mankind unless it be one who can overcome her with instances and arguments and can return a sufficient reply to all her questions; and this is upon condition that, should he come off vanquisher, he shall become her mate, but if vanquished she will cut off his head, and on such wise has she done with ninety-and-nine men of the noblest blood, as sons of the Kings and sundry others. Furthermore, she has a towering castle founded upon the heights that overfrown the whole of this city whence she can descry all who pass under its walls."

As soon as the young Prince heard these words from the love of the King's daughter and he passed that night as it were to him the longest of nights, nor would he believe that the next morn had morrowed. But when dawned the day and anon showed its sheen and shone, he arose without let or stay and after saddling his mare mounted her and turned towards the palace belonging to the King's daughter; and presently reaching it, took his station at the gateway. Hereat all those present considered him and asked him saying, "What is the cause of your standing hereabouts?" to which he answered, "I desire speech with the Princess." But when they heard these words, all fell to addressing him with kindly words and courteous and dissuading him from his desire and saying, "Ho you beautiful youngling! fear [194] Allah and pity yourself and have pity upon your youth; nor dare seek converse with this Princess, for that she has slain fourscore and nineteen men of the nobles and sons of the kings and for you sore we fear that you shall complete the century."

The Prince, however, would not hear a word from them nor heed their counsel; neither would he be warned by the talk of others than they; nay he persisted in standing at the Palace gateway. And presently he asked admission to go in to the King's daughter; but this was refused by the Princess, who contented herself with sending forth to him her Tarjumánah, her Linguist-dame, to bespeak him and say, "Ho you fair youth! are you ready and longing to affront dangers and difficulties?" He replied, "I am." "Then," said she, "go you to the King the father of this Princess and show yourself and acquaint him with your affair and your aim, after which do you bear witness against yourself in presence of the Kazi that if you conquer his daughter in her propositions and she fail of replying to a query of yours you shall become her mate; whereas if she vanquish you she shall lawfully cut off your head, [195] even as she has decapitated so many before your time. And when this is done come you back to us."

The Prince immediately fared for the monarch and did as he was bidden; then he returned to the Linguist-dame and reported all his proceedings before the King and also the Kazi. After this he was led in to the presence of the Princess and with him was the afore-mentioned Tarjumánah who brought him a cushion of silk for the greater comfort of his sitting; and the two fell to questioning and resolving queries and problems in full sight of a large attendance. Began the Tarjumánah, interpreting the words of her lady who was present, "Ho you the Youth! my mistress says to you, Do you inform me concerning an ambulant moving sepulchre whose inmate is alive." He answered and said, "The moving sepulchre is the whale that swallowed Jonas (upon whom be the choicest of Salams! [196]), and the Prophet was quick in the whale's belly." She pursued, "Tell me concerning two combatants who fight each other but not with hands or feet, and who withal never say a say or speak a speech." He answered saying, "The bull and the buffalo who encounter each other by ramming with horns." She continued, "Point out to me a tract of earth which saw not the sun save for a single time and since that never." He answered saying, "This is the sole of the Red Sea when Moses the Prophet (upon whom be The Peace!) smote it with his rod and clove it asunder so that the Children of Israel crossed over it on dry ground, which was never seen but only once." [197] She resumed, "Relate to me about that which drank water during its life-time and ate meat after its death?" He answered saying, "This be the Rod [198] of Moses the Prophet (upon whom be The Peace!) which, when a living branch [199] struck water from its living root and died only when severed from the parent tree. Now Almighty Allah cast it upon the land of Egypt by the hand of Moses, what time this Prophet drowned Pharaoh and his host [200] and with it clove the Red Sea, after which that Rod became a dragon and swallowed up the wands of all the Magicians of Misraim."

Asked she, "Give me tidings of a thing which is not of mankind nor of the Jánn-kind, neither of the beasts nor of the birds?" He answered saying, "This whereof you speak is that mentioned by Solomon, to with the Louse, [201], and secondly the Ant." She enquired, "Tell me to what end Almighty Allah created the creation and for what aim of wisdom did He quicken this creation and for what object did He cause death to be followed by resurrection and resurrection by the rendering men's accounts?" He answered saying, "God created all creatures that they might witness His handicraft, and he did them die that they might behold his absolute dominion and He requickened them to the end that they learn His All-Might, and He decreed their rendering account that they might consider His wisdom and His justice."

She questioned him saying, "Tell me concerning three, of whom my first was not born of father and mother and yet died; and my second was begotten of sire and born of woman yet died not, and my third was born of father and mother yet died not by human death?" He answered saying, "The first were Adam and Eve, [202] the second was Elias [203] the Prophet and the third was Lot's wife who died not the death of the general, for that she was turned into a pillar of salt." Said she, "Relate to me concerning one who in this world had two names?" and he answered saying, "This is Jacob, sire of the Twelve Tribes, to whom Allah vouchsafed the title of Israel, which is Man with El or God." [204] She said, "Inform me concerning the Nákús, or the Gong, [205] who was the inventor thereof and at what time was it first struck in this world?" He answered saying, "The Gong was invented by Noah, who first smote upon it in the Ark." And after this she stinted not to question him nor he to resolve her riddles until evening fell, when said the King's daughter to the Linguist-dame, "Tell the young man that he may now depart, and let him come to me betimes next morning when, if I conquer him, I will give him drink of the cup his fellows drained; and, should he vanquish me, I will become his wife."

Then the Tarjumánah delivered her message word for word, and the Youth went forth from the Princess with fire aflame in his heart and spent the longest of nights hardly believing that the morn would morrow. But when day broke and the dawn came with its sheen and shone upon all mankind, he arose from his sleep and fared with the first light to the palace where the King's daughter bade the Linguist-dame introduce him, and when he came in ordered him to be seated. As soon as he had taken seat she gave her commands to the Tarjumánah, who said, "My lady directs you to inform her what may be the tree bearing a dozen boughs, each clothed with thirty leaves and these of two colors, one half white and the other moiety black?" He answered saying, "Now that tree is the year, and its twelve branches are the dozen months, while the thirty leaves upon each of these are the thirty white days and the thirty black nights." Hereat said she, "Tell me, what tree was it bore many a bough and manifold leaves which presently became flesh and blood?" He answered saying, "This was the Rod of Moses the Prophet (upon whom be The Peace!) which was at first a tree but which after cutting became a serpent with flesh and blood." Continued she, "Inform me what became of Moses' Rod and Noah's Ark, and where now be they?" He answered saying, "They are at this tide sunken in the Lake of Tabariyyah, [206] and both, at the end of time, will be brought out by a man named Al-Násirí. [207] She pursued, "Acquaint me with spun yarn, whence did it originate and who was it first practised spinning the same?" He answered, saying, "Almighty Allah from the beginning of mankind ordered the Archangel Gabriel to visit Eve and say to her, 'Spin for yourself and for Adam waistcloths wherewith you may veil your persons.'" [208] She enquired, "Tell me concerning the Asáfír, [209] and why they were so called, and who first named them with such name?" He answered saying, "There was in the days of the Moses the Prophet (upon whom be The Peace!) a fowl called Fír, and in the time of Solomon the King (upon whom be The Peace!) all the birds paid him obedience, even as did all the beasts, and albeit each and every created thing was subject to the Prophet, despite this Fír would not show submission: so the Wise King sent a body of birds to bring him into the presence, but he refused to present himself. Presently they returned to the Prophet who asked them, "Where is Fír?" and they answered, "O our lord, 'Asá Fír,' [210] whence that name has clung to the fowls."

She resumed, "Inform me of the two Stationaries and the two Moveables and the two Conjoineds and the two Disjoineds by jealousy and the twain which be eternal Foes." He answered saying, "Now the two Stationaries be Heaven and Earth and the two Moveables are the Sun and the Moon; the two Conjoineds are Night and Day and the two Disjoineds by jealousy are the Soul and the Body and the two Hostiles are Death and Life." [211] On this wise the Linguist-dame ceased not to question him and he to reply solving all her problems until eve closed in. Then she bade him go forth that night and on the next day come again to her. Accordingly, the young Prince returned to his Khan and no sooner had he made sure that the morn had morrowed than he resolved to see if that day would bring him anything better than had come to him before.

So arising betimes he made for the palace of the King's daughter and was received and introduced by the Tarjumánah who seated him as was her wont and presently she began, saying, "My lady bids you inform her of a thing which if a man do that same 'tis unlawful; and if a man do not that same 'tis also unlawful." He answered, saying, "I will: this is the prayer [212] of a drunken man which is in either case illegal." Said she, "Tell me how far is the interval between Heaven and Earth?" and he answered saying, "That bridged over by the prayer of Moses the Prophet [213] (upon him be The Peace!) whom Allah Almighty saved and preserved." She said, "And how far is it betwixt East and West?" whereto he answered saying, "The space of a day and the course of the Sun wending from Orient unto Occident." Then she asked, "Let me know what was the habit [214] of Adam in Paradise?" and he answered saying, "Adam's habit in Eden was his flowing hair." [215] She continued, "Tell me of Abraham the Friend (upon whom be The Peace!) how was it that Allah chose him out and called him 'Friend?'" [216] He answered saying, "Verily the Lord determined to tempt and to test him albeit he knew right clearly that the Prophet was free of will yet fully capable of enduring the trial; natheless, He resolved to do on this wise that he might stablish before men the truth of His servant's trust in the Almighty and the fairness of his faith and the purity of his purpose. So the Lord bade him offer to Him his son Is'hák [217] as a Corban or Sacrifice; and of the truth of his trust he took his child and would have slain him as a victim. But when he drew his knife with the purpose of slaughtering the youth he was thus addressed by the Most Highest Creator, 'Now indeed well I wot that you gatherest [218] me and keepest my covenant: so take you yonder rain and slay it as a victim in the stead of Is'hák.' And after this he entitled him 'Friend.'"

She pursued, "Inform me touching the sons of Israel how many were they at the time of the going forth from Egypt?" He answered, saying, "When they marched out of Misraim-land they numbered six hundred thousand fighting [219] men besides women and children." She continued, "Do you point out to me, some place on earth which is higher than the Heavens;" and he answered saying, "This is Jerusalem [220] the Exalted and she stands far above the Firmament." Then the Youth turning to the Linguist-dame, said, "O my lady, long and longsome has been the exposition of that which is between us, and were your lady to ask me for all time questions such as these and the like of them, I by the All-might of Allah shall return a full and sufficient answer to one and all. But, in lieu of so doing, I desire of your mistress the Princess to ask of her one question and only one: and, if she satisfy me of the significance I claim therefor, let her give me to drain the cup of my foregoers whom she overcame and slew; and if she fail in the attempt she shall own herself conquered and become my wife—and The Peace!" [221]

Now this was said in the presence of a mighty host there present, the great of them as well as the small thereof; so the Tarjumánah answered willy-nilly, "Say, O Youth, whatever is the will of you and speak out that which is in the mind of you." He rejoined, "Tell your lady that she deign enlighten me concerning a man who was in this condition. He was born and brought up in the highest of prosperity but Time turned upon him and Poverty mishandled him; [222] so he mounted his father and clothed him with his mother [223] and he fared forth to seek comfort and happiness at the hand of Allah Almighty. And then Death met him on the way and Doom bore him upon his head and his courser saved him from destruction when he drank water which came neither from the sky nor from the ground. Now see you who may be that man and do you give me answer concerning him." [224]

But when the Princess heard this question, she was confused with exceeding confusion touching the reply to be replied in presence of a posse of the people, and she was posed and puzzled and perplext to escape the difficulty and nothing availed her save addressing the Tarjumánah and saying, "Do you bid this Youth wend his ways and remove himself until the morrow." The Linguist-dame did as she was bidden, adding, "And on the morrow (Inshallah!) there shall be nothing save weal;" and the Prince went forth leaving the folk aghast at the question he had urged upon the King's daughter. But as soon as he left her the young lady commanded the Tarjumánah to let slaughter somewhat of the most toothsome poultry and to prepare them for food as her mistress might direct her; together with dainty meats and delicate sweetmeats and the finest fruits fresh and dried and all manner of other eatables and drinkables, and lastly to take a skin-bottle filled with good old wine. Then she changed her usual garb and donned the most sumptuous dress of all her gear; and, taking her Duenna and favourite handmaiden with a few of her women for comitive, she repaired to the quarters of the Youth, the King's son; and the time of her visit was the night-tide.

Presently, reaching the Khan she said to her guardian, "Go you in to him alone while I hide me somewhere behind the door and do you sit between his hands;" after which she taught the old woman all she desired her do of dissimulation and artifice. The slave obeyed her mistress and going in accosted the young man with the salam; and, seating herself before him, said, "Ho you the Youth! Verily there is here a lovely damsel, delightsome and perfect of qualities, whose peer is not in her age, and well nigh able is she to make the sun fare backwards [225] and to illumine the universe in lieu thereof. Now when you were wont to visit us in the apartment of the Princess, this maiden looked upon you and found you a fair youth; so her heart loved you with excessive love and desired you with exceeding desire and to such degree that she insisted upon accompanying me and she has now taken station at your door longing to enter. So do you grant her permission that she come in and appear in your presence and then retire to some privacy where she may stand in your service, a slave to your will." [226] The Prince replied, "Whoever seeks us let enter with weal and welfare, and well come and welcome and fair welcome to each and every of such guests." Hereat the Princess went in as did all those who were with her, and presently after taking seat they brought out and set before the Youth their whole store of edibles and potables and the party fell to eating and drinking and converse, exchanging happy sayings blended with wit and disport and laughter, while the Princess made it her especial task to toy with her host deeming that he knew her not to be the King's daughter.

He also stinted not to take his pleasure with her; and on this wise they feasted and caroused and enjoyed themselves and were cheered and the converse between them was delightful. The Duenna, however, kept plying the Prince with wine, mere and pure, until she had made him drunken and his carousal had so mastered him that he required her person of her; however she refused herself and questioned him of the enigma wherewith he had overcome her mistress; while he, for stress of drunkenness, was incapacitated by stammering to explain her anything thereof. Hereupon the Princess, having doffed her upper dress, propped herself sideways upon a divan cushion and stretched herself at full length and the Youth for the warmth of his delight in her and his desire to her anon recovering his speech explained to her the reply of his riddle. The King's daughter then joyed with mighty great joy as though she had won the world universal; [227] and, springing to her feet incontinently, of her extreme gladness she would not delay to finish her disport with her wooer; but before the morning morrowed she departed and entered her palace. Now in so doing she clean forgot her outer robes and the wine-service and what remained of meat and drink.

The Youth had been overcome with sleep and after slumbering he awoke at dawn when he looked round and saw none of the company about him; withal he recognised the princely garments which were of the most sumptuous and costly, robes of brocade and sendal and suchlike, together with jewels and adornments: and scattered about lay sundry articles of the wine-service and fragments of the food they had brought with them. And from these signs of things forgotten he learnt that the King's daughter had visited him in person and he was certified that she had beguiled him with her wiles until she had wrung from him the reply of his question. So as soon as it was morning-tide he arose and went, as was his wont, to the Princess's palace where he was met by the Tarjumánah who said to him, "O Youth, is it your pleasure that my lady expound to you her explanation of the enigma yesterday proposed by you?" "I will tell the very truth," answered he; "and relate to you what befell me since I saw you last, and 'twas this. When I left you there came to me a lovely bird, delightsome and perfect of charms, and I indeed entertained her with uttermost honor and worship; we ate and we drank together, but at night she shook her feathers and flew away from me. And if she deny this I will produce her plumage before her father and all present."

Now when the Sovran, the sire of the Princess, heard these words concerning his daughter, to wit, that the youth had conquered her in her contention and that she had fared to his quarters to the end that she might wring from him an explanation of the riddle which she was unable to ree or reply thereto, he would do nothing else save to summon the Cohen [228] and the Lords of his land and the Grandees of his realm and the Notables of his kith and kin. And when the Priest and all made act of presence, he told them the whole tale first and last; namely, the conditions to the Youth conditioned, that if overcome by his daughter and unable to answer her questions he should be let drain the cup of destruction like his fellows, and if he overcame her he should claim her to wife. Furthermore he declared that the Youth had answered, with full and sufficient answer, all he had been asked without doubt or hesitation; while at last he had proposed to her an enigma which she had been powerless to solve; and in this matter he had vanquished her twice (he having answered her and she having failed to answer him). "For which reason," concluded the King, "'tis only right that he marry her; even as was the condition between them two; and it becomes our first duty to adjudge their contention and decide their case according to covenant and he being doubtless the conqueror to bid write his writ of marriage with her. But what say ye?" They replied, "This is the rightest of redes; moreover the Youth, a fair and a pleasant, becomes her well and she likewise befits him; and their lot is a wondrous."

So they bade write the marriage writ and the Cohen, arising forthright, pronounced the union auspicious and began blessing and praying for the pair and all present. In due time the Prince went in to her and consummated the marriage according to the custom established by Allah and His Holy Law; and thereafter he related to his bride all that had betided him, from beginning to end, especially how he had sold his parents to one of the Kings. Now when she heard these words, she had pity upon his case and soothed his spirit saying to him, "Be of good cheer and keep your eyes clear and cool of tear." Then, after a little while the Princess bestowed upon her bridegroom a mint of money that he might fare forth and free his father and his mother. Accordingly the Prince, accepting her largesse, sought the King to whom he had pledged his parents (and they were still with him in all weal and welfare) and going in to him made his salam and kissed ground and told him the whole tale of the past and the conditions of death or marriage he had made with the King's daughter and of his wedding her after overcoming her in contention. So the monarch honored him with honor galore than which nothing could be more; and, when the Prince paid him over the moneys, he asked, "What are these dirhams?" "The price of my parents you paid to me," answered the other. But the King exclaimed, "I gave you not to the value of your father and mother moneys of such amount as this sum. I only largessed you with a mare and a suit of clothes which was not defraying a debt but presenting you with a present and thereby honoring you with due honor. Then Alhamdolillah-laud be to the Lord, who preserved you and enabled you to win your wish, and now arise and take your parents and return in safety to your bride." The Prince hereupon thanked him and praised Allah for the royal guerdon and favours and the fair treatment wherewith he had been entreated; after which he craved leave to receive his parents in charge and wend his ways. And when permission was granted to him, he wished all good wishes to the King and taking his father and his mother in weal and welfare he went his ways with them, in joy and gladness and gratitude for all blessings and benefits by Allah upon him bestowed, till he had returned to his bride.

Here he found that his father-in-law had deceased during his absence, so he took seat in lieu of him upon the throne of the kingdom; and he and his consort, during all the days of their life in this world, ceased not eating and drinking in health and well-being and eating and drinking in joy and happiness and bidding and forbidding until they quitted this mundane scene to the safeguard of the Lord God. And here ends and is perfected the history of the Youth, the King's son, and the sale of his parents and his falling into the springes of the Princess who insisted upon proposing problems to all her wooers with the condition that if they did not reply she would do them drain the cup of destruction and on this wise had slain a many of men; and, in fine, how she was worsted by and she fell to the lot of this youth whom Allah gifted with understanding to ree all her riddles and who had confounded her with his question whereto she availed not to reply; when his father-in-law died, succeeded to the kingdom which he ruled so well. [229]


The Tale of the Warlock and the Young Cook of Baghdad


Here we begin with the aidance of Allah Almighty, the Tale of the Warlock and the Young Cook of Baghdad. [234]

It is related (and Allah is All knowing!) of a certain man who was a Warlock, that Destiny drove him from town to town until at last he entered Baghdad city and dismounted at a Khán of the Khans where he spent the night of arrival. Then, rising early next morning, he walked about the highways and wandered around the lanes and he stinted not passing from market street to market street, solacing himself with a sight of many places, till he reached the Long Bazar, whence he could descry the whole site of the city. Now he narrowly considered the land, and, lo and behold! it was a capital without peer among the cities, where-through coursed the Dajlah River blended with the River Furát [235] and over the united stream were thrown seven bridges of boats; all these were bound one to other for the folk to pass over on their several pursuits, especially for the pleasure seekers who fared forth to the palm orchards and the vergiers abounding in fruits while the birds were hymning Allah, the Sole, the All-conquering.

Now one day as this Warlock was amusing himself among the markets he passed by the shop of a Cook before whom were set for sale dressed meats of all kinds and colors; [236] and, looking at the youth, he saw that he was rising fourteen and beautiful as the moon on the fourteenth night; and he was elegant and habited in a habit as it had just come from the tailor's hand for its purity and excellent fit, and one had said that he (the artisan) had labored hard thereat, for the sheen of it shimmered like unto silver. [237] Then the Warlock considering the face of this Cook saw his color wan as the hue of metal leaves [238] and he was lean of limb; [239] so he took station facing him and said to him, "The Peace be upon you, O my brother," and said the other in reply, "And upon you be The Peace and the Truth of Allah and His blessings: so well come to you and welcome and fair welcome. Honour me, O my lord, by suffering me to serve you with the noonday meal."

Hereat the Wizard entered the shop and the Kitchener took up two or three platters white as the whitest silver; and, turning over into each one a different kind of meat set them between the hands of the stranger who said to him, "Seat you, O my son." And when his bidding was obeyed he added, "I see you ailing and your complexion is yellow exceedingly: what is this that has affected you and what is your disorder and what limb of your limbs pain you and is it long since you are in such case?" Now when the Cook heard this say he drew a sigh of regret from the depths of his heart and the soles of his feet and said he weeping, "Allah upon you, O my lord, remind me not of what has betided me!" But said the other, "Tell me what may be your disease and whereof cost you complain; nor conceal from me your pain; for that I am a physician and by aidance of Allah an experienced one; and I have a medicine for your malady."

Hereat the youth fell to moaning and groaning and presently replied, "In very sooth, O my lord, I have neither pain nor complaint, save that I am a lover." The Warlock asked, "Are you indeed a lover?" whereto the Cook make answer, "And not only a lover but a lover parted from his beloved." "On whom hangs your heart, tell me?" continued the Mediciner and the youth replied, "Leave me for the nonce till such time as I am quit of my business, and return to me about mid-afternoon, that I may inform you of mine affair and acquaint you with the case I am in." The Warlock rejoined, "Arise now to your work lest it be miswrought by loitering;" and so saying he ate whatever of meats had been served up to him and fared forth to thread the Bazars of Baghdad and solace himself by seeing the city. But when it was the hour of Al 'Asr—the mid afternoon prayer—he went back to the Cook and found that by this time he had wrought all his work, and as soon as the youth sighted him he rejoiced in him and his spirits were cheered and he said in his mind, "Haply joy shall come to me from the healing hand of this Mediciner;" so he shut his shop and taking with him his customer brought him to his own home.

Now this young Kitchener was of amplest means which he had inherited from either parent; so as soon as they entered his quarters he served up food and the two ate and drank and were gladdened and comforted. After this said the guest to his host, "Now relate to me the manner of your story and what is the cause of your disorder?" "O my lord," said the youth, "I must inform you that the Caliph Al-Mu'tazid Bi'llah, [240] the Commander of the Faithful, has a daughter fair of favour, and gracious of gesture; beautiful delightsome and dainty of waist and flank, a maiden in whom all the signs and signals of loveliness are present, and the whole ensemble is independent of description: seer never saw her like and relator never related of anything that matches her in stature and seemliness and graceful bearing of head. Now albeit a store of suitors galore, the grandees and the Kings, asked her from the Caliph, her sire refused to part with her, nor gave her neither would he give her to anyone thereof. And every Friday when fare the folk to the Mosques that they pray the prayers of meeting-day, all the merchants and men who buy and sell and the very artisans and what not, leave their shops and warehouses [241] and taverns [242] unbolted and wide open and flock to congregational devotions. And at such time this rare maiden comes down from her palace and solaces herself with beholding the Bazars and then she enters the Hammam and bathes therein and straightway goes forth and fares homewards. But one Friday said I to myself, 'I will not go to the Mosque, for I would fain look upon her with a single look;' and when prayer-time came and the folk flocked to the fane for divine service, I hid myself within my shop. Presently that august damsel appeared with a group of forty handmaidens all as full moons newly risen and each fairer than her fellows, while she amiddlemost rained light upon them as she were the irradiating sun; and the bondswomen would have kept her from sight by thronging around her and they carried her skirts by means of bent rods [243] golden and silver. I looked at her but one look when straightway my heart fell in love to her burning as a live coal and from mine eyes tears railed and until now I am still in that same yearning, and what yearning!"

And so saying the youth cried out with an outcry whereby his soul was like to leave his body. "Is this case still your case?" asked the Warlock, and the youth answered, "Yes, O my lord;" when the other enquired, "If I bring you and her together what will you give me?" and the young Cook replied, "My money and my life which shall be between your hands!" Hereupon said the Mediciner, "Up with you and bring me a phial of metal and seven needles and a piece of fresh Lign-aloes; [244] also a bit of cooked meat, [245] and some sealing-clay and the shoulder-blade of a sheep together with felt and sendal of seven kinds."

The youth fared forth and did his bidding, when the Sage took the shoulder-blades and wrote upon them Koranic verses and adjurations which would please the Lord of the Heavens and, wrapping them in felt, swathed them with silken stuff of sevenfold sorts. Then, taking the phial he thrust the seven needles into the green Lign-aloes and set it in the cooked meat which he made fast with the sealing clay. Lastly he conjured over these objects with a Conjuration [246] which was, "I have knocked, I have knocked at the hall doors of Earth to summon the Jánn, and the Jánn have knocked for the Jánn against the Shaytán." Hereat appeared to me the son of Al bin Imrán [247] with a snake and baldrick'd with a basilisk and cried, "Who is this trader and son of a slave-girl who has knocked at the ground for us this evening?" "Then do you, O youth, reply, 'I am a lover and of age youthful and my love is to a young lady; and unto your gramarye I have had recourse, O folk of manliness and generosity and masterful deeds: so work with me and confirm mine affair and aid me in this matter. See you not how Such a one, daughter of Such a one, oppression and wrong to me has done, nor is she with me in affection as she was anon?' They shall answer you, 'Let it be, as is said, in the tail;' [248] then do you set the objects upon a fire exceeding fierce and recite then over them, 'This is the business; and were Such-a-one, daughter of Such-a-one, within the well of Káshán [249] or in the city Ispahan or in the towns of men who with cloaks buttoned tight and ever ready good fame to blight, [250] let her come forth and seek union with the beloved.' Whereto she will reply 'You are the lord and I am the bondswoman.' "

Now the youth abode marvelling at such marvel-forms and the Warlock having repeated to him these words three times, turned to him and said "Arise to your feet and perfume and fumigate your person and don your choicest dress and dispread your bed, for at this very hour you shall see your mistress by your side." And so saying the Sage cast out of hand the shoulder-blades and set the phial upon the fire. Thereupon the youth arose without stay or delay and bringing a bundle of raiment the rarest, he spread it and habited himself, doing whatever the Wizard had bid him; nonetheless he could not believe that his mistress would appear. However before a scanty space of time had elapsed, lo and behold! the young lady bearing her bedding [251] and still sleeping passed through the house door and she was bright and beautiful as the easting sun. But when the youth the Cook sighted her, he was perplexed and his wits took flight with his sense and he cried aloud saying, "This is nothing save a wondrous matter!" "And the same," said the Sage, "is that you required." Said the Cook, "And thou, O my lord are of the Hallows of Allah," and kissed his hand and thanked him for his kindly deed. "Up with you and take your pleasure," cried the Warlock; so the lover crept under the coverlet into the bed and he threw his arms round the fair one and kissed her between the eyes; after which he bussed her on the mouth.

She sensed a sensation in herself and straightway awaking opened her eyes and beheld a youth embracing her, so she asked him, "Ho thou, who art thou?" Answered he, "One by your eyes a captive ta'en and of your love the slain and of none save yourself the fain." Hereat she looked at him with a look which her heart for love longing struck and again asked him, "O my beloved; tell me then, who are you, a being of mankind or of Jánn-kind?" whereto he answered, "I am human and of the most honorable." She resumed, "Then who was it brought me hither to you?" and he responded, "The Angels and the Spirits, the Jinns and the Jann." "Then I swear you, O my dearling," said she, "that you bid them bear me hither to your arms every night," and said he, "Hearkening and obeying, O my lady, and for me also this be the bourne of all wishes." Then, each having kissed other, they slept in mutual embrace until dawn.

But when the morning morrowed and showed its sheen and shone, behold, the Warlock appeared and, calling the youth who came to him with a smiling face, said to him, "How was it with your soul this night?" [252] and both lovers cried, "We were in the Garden of Paradise together with the Hur and Ghilman: [253] Allah requite you for us with all weal." Then they passed into the Hammam and when they had bathed, the youth said, "O my lord, what shall we do with the young lady and how shall she get to her household and what shall be the case of me without her?" "Feel no grief," said the other, "and quit all care of anything: e'en as she came so shall she go; nor shall any of Almighty Allah's creatures know anything of her."

Hereat the Sage dismissed her by the means which conveyed her, nor did she cease to bear her bedding with her every night and to visit the youth with all joyance and delight. Now after a few weeks had gone by, this young lady happening to be upon the terrace roof of her palace in company with her mother, turned her back to the sun, and when the heat struck her between the shoulders her belly swelled; so her parent asked her, "O my daughter, what have you that you juts out after this wise?" "I know nothing thereof," answered she; so the mother put forth her hand to the belly of her child and found her pregnant; whereupon she screamed and buffeted her face and asked, "Whence did this befall you?" The women-attendants all heard her cries and running up to her enquired, "What has caused you, O our lady, such case as this?" whereto she replied, "I would bespeak the Caliph." So the women sought him and said, "O our lord, you are wanted by our lady;" and he did their bidding and went to his wife, but at first sight he noted the condition of his daughter and asked her, "What is to do with you and what has brought on you such calamity?" Hereupon the Princess told him how it was with her and he exclaimed as he heard it, "O my daughter, I am the Caliph and Commander of the Faithful, and you have been sought to wife of me by the Kings of the earth one and all, but you did not accept them as connections and now you do such deed as this! I swear the most binding oaths and I vow by the tombs of my sires and my grandsires, if you say me sooth you shall be saved; but unless you tell me truth concerning whatever befell you and from whom came this affair and the quality of the man's intention towards you, I will slaughter you and under earth I will sepulchre you."

Now when the Princess heard from her father's mouth these words and had pondered this swear he had sworn she replied, "O my sire, albeit lying may save yet is truth-telling the more saving side. Verily, O my father, 'tis some time before this day that my bed bears me up every night and carries me to a house of the houses in which dwells a youth, a model of beauty and loveliness, who causes every seer to languish; and he beds with me and sleeps by my side until dawn, when my couch uplifts me and returns with me to the Palace: nor know I the manner of my going and the mode of my coming is alike unknown to me."

The Caliph hearing these her words marvelled at this her tale with exceeding marvel and fell into the uttermost of wonderment, but bethinking him of his Wazir, a man of penetrative wit, sagacious, astute, and exceedingly shrewd, he summoned him to the presence and acquainted him as soon as he came with this affair and what had befallen his daughter; to wit, how she was borne away in her bed without knowing where or anything else. Said the Minister after taking thought for a full told hour, "O Caliph of the Time and the Age, I have a device by whose virtue I do opine we shall arrive at the stead where wends the Princess;" and said the Caliph "What may be this device of yours?" "Bid bring me a bag;" rejoined the Wazir, "which I will let fill with millet;" [254] so they brought him one and he after stuffing the same with grain set it upon the girl's bed and close to her where lay her head, leaving the mouth open to the intent that when during the coming night her couch might be carried away, the millet in going and returning might be shed upon the path. "Allah bless you, Ho you the Wazir!" cried the Caliph: "this device of your is passing good and fair fall it for a sleight than which nothing can be slyer and good luck to it for a proof than which nothing can be better proven."

Now as soon as it was even-tide, the couch was carried off as had happened every night and the grain was strewn broadcast upon the path, like a stream, from the gateway of the Palace to the door of the young Cook's lodging, in which the Princess righted as was her wont until dawn of day. And when morn appeared the Sage came and carried off with him the youth to the Hammam where he found privacy and said to him, "O my son, if you ask me anything touching your mistress's kith and kin, I bid you know that they have indeed discovered her condition and against you they have devised a device." Exclaimed the youth, "Verily we are Allah's and unto Him are we returning! What may be your counsel in this affair? If they slay me I shall be a martyr on Allah's path; [255] but do you wend your ways and save yourself and may the Almighty requite you with all of welfare; you, through whom mine every wish I have won, and the whole of my designs I have fulfilled; after which let them do with me as they desire."

The Warlock replied, "O my son, grieve not neither fear, for nothing shall befall you of harm, and I intend to show you marvels and miracles wrought upon them." When the youth heard these words his spirits were cheered, and joying with joy exceeding he replied, "Almighty Allah reward you for me with fullest welfare!" Then the two went forth from the Hammam and went home. But as soon as morning morrowed, the Wazir repaired to the Caliph; and, both going to the Princess together, found her in her bower and the bag upon her bed clean empty of millet, at sight of which the Minister exclaimed, "Now indeed we have caught our debtor. Up with us and to horse, O Caliph of the Age, and sum and substance of the Time and the Tide, and follow we the millet and track its trail." The Commander of the Faithful immediately gave orders to mount, and the two, escorted by their host, rode forth on the traces of the grain till they drew near the house, when the youth heard the jingle and jangle [256] of horses' tramp and the wrangle and jangle of men's outcries.

Upon this said the Cook to the Warlock, "Here they draw near to seize me, O my lord, what is there now for me to do?" and said the other, "Rise and fill me an ewer with water then mount with it to the terrace-roof and pour the contents round and about the house, after which come down to me." The youth did his bidding, and meanwhile the Caliph and the Wazir and the soldiery had approached the house when, lo and behold! the site had become an island amiddlemost a main dashing with clashing billows. [257] But when the Commander of the Faithful sighted this sea, he was perplexed with mighty great perplexity and enquired of the Wazir, "At what time did such great water appear in this place?" The Minister replied, "I never knew that here was any stream, albeit well I know that the Tigris river flows amiddlemost the capital; but this is a magical current." So saying he bade the soldiery urge their horses into the water without fear, and every one rode as he had directed until all who entered lost their lives and many men were drowned. Hereupon cried the Prince of True Believers, "O Wazir, we are about to destroy our host and to fare with them!" and cried the other, "How shall we act, O Caliph of the Age? Haply our first, nay our best way, is to ask help of those within the house and grant to them indemnity while they exchange words with us and we see anon what will come of their affair." "Do as beseems you," answered the Prince of True Believers; whereupon the Minister commanded his men to cry aloud upon the household and they sued for help during a length of time.

But the Sage, hearing their shouts, said to the youth, "Arise and go up to the terrace and say to the Caliph of the Age, 'Thou are in safety; turn away your steps hence and presently we will meet your Highness in health and weal; otherwise [258] your daughter shall be lost and your army shall be destroyed, and thou, O Commander of the Faithful, will depart and return as one driven out. Do you wend your ways: this is not the mode of meeting us and in such manner there is no management.' " The Cook did as he was bidden, and when the two heard his words, said the Wazir to the Caliph, "Verily these are nothing save Magicians, otherwise they must be of the fulsomest of the Jann, for indeed never heard we nor saw we anything of this." Hereupon the Prince of True Believers turned his back upon the place and he sorrowful and strait of breast and disheartened of heart; so he went down to his Palace and sat there for a full-told hour when behold, the Warlock and the Cook appeared before him.

But as soon as they stood in the presence the Caliph cried out, "O Linkman, bring me the head of yonder youth from between his shoulders!" Hereupon the Executioner came forward and tearing a strip off the youth's robe-skirt bandaged his eyes; then he walked thrice round about him brandishing his blade over the victim's head and lastly cried, "O Caliph of the Age, shall I make away with this youth?" Answered the Caliph, "Yes, after you shall have stricken off his head."

Hearing this the Sworder raised his hand and smote, when suddenly his grip was turned backwards upon a familiar of his who stood beside him, and it lighted upon his neck with such force that his head hew off and fell at the Caliph's feet. The King and the Wazir, were perplexed at this affair, and the former cried out, "What is this? Are you gone blind, O Bhang eater, that your stroke has missed the mark and you have not known your familiar from this youth who kneels before you? Smite him without delay!" Hereupon the Linkman again raised his hand to obey his lord, but the blow fell upon the neck of his varlet and the head flew off and rolled at the feet of the Caliph and his Chief Councillor. At this second mishap the wits of all present were bewildered and the King cried, "What business is this, O Wazir, whereto the other made answer, "O Caliph of the Time and rare gift of the Age and the Tide, what can you do, O my lord, with such as these? And whoever avails to take away o' nights your daughter upon her bed and spread a sea around his house, the same also has power to tear your kingdom from your grasp; nay more, to practice upon your life. Now 'tis my advice that you rise and kiss the hand of this Sage and sue his protection, [259] lest he work upon us worse than this. Believe me, 'twere better for you, O my lord, to do as I bid you and thus 'twill be well for us rather than to rise up as adversaries of this man."

Hearing such words from his Minister, the King bade them raise the youth from the strip of blood-rug and remove the bandage from before his eyes, after which he rose to his feet, and, kissing the Warlock's hand, said to him, "In very sooth we knew you not nor were we aware of the measure of your excellence. But, O teacher of the Time and sum and substance of revolving Tide, why have you wrought to me on this wise in the matter of my daughter and destroyed my servants and soldiers?" "O Viceregent of Allah upon His Earth," replied the Sage, "I am a stranger, and having eaten bread and salt with this youth, I formed friendship and familiarity with him: then, seeing his case which was sad and his state which was marvellous as it had afflicted him with sickness, I took compassion upon him; moreover I designed to show you all what I am and what Almighty Allah has taught me of occult knowledge. Hitherto there has been nothing save weal, and now I desire of your favour that you marry your daughter to this youth, my familiar, for that she suits none other save himself." Said the Caliph, "This proceeding I look upon as the best and it befits us that we obey your bidding."

Presently he robed the youth with a sumptuous robe worth the kingdom of a King, and commanded him to sit beside the presence and seated the Sage upon a chair of ebony-wood. Now while they were in converse the Warlock turned round and beheld arear of the Caliph a hanging of sendal whereupon stood figured lions twain: so he signed with his hand to these forms which were mighty huge of limb and awesome to look upon, when each put forth his paw upon his fellow and both roared with roars like unto the bellow of ear-rending thunder. Hereat all present were perplex in the extreme and were in admiration at that matter and especially the Prince of True Believers who cried, "O Wazir what see you in this business?" The Wazir replied, "O Caliph of the Age, verily Allah Almighty to you has sent this Sage that He [260] might show you such marvels as these." Then the Warlock signalled with his hand to the lions which shrank till they became as cats which carried on the combat; and both Caliph and Wazir wondered thereat with excessive wonderment.

And then said the King to the Minister, "Bid the Sage display to us more of his marvels;" and accordingly the Wazir obeyed his lord's behest, and the Warlock replied, "To hear is to obey." He then said, "Bring hither to me a chauldron full of water;" and when it was brought he asked the Courtiers, "Which of you would divert himself?" "I," said the Wazir; when said the Sage, "Do you rise to your feet and doff your robes and gird you with a belt:" whereto said the other, "Bring me a waistcloth;" and when it was brought he did with it as he was bidden. Hereat said the Warlock, "Seat you in the centre of the cauldron;" so he plunged into the water, but when he would have seated him amiddlemost thereof as ordered he saw only that he had entered a sea dashing with surges clashing in which whoever goes is lost to view, and whence whoever comes is born anew; and he fell to swimming from side to side intending to issue forth, while the waves suffered him not to make the shore. And while he was in this case behold, a billow of the billows vomited [261] him up from the sea to the strand and he stood on dry land, when he surveyed his person and suddenly saw that he had become a woman with the breasts of a woman and the solution of continuity like a woman, and long black hair flowing down to his heels even as a woman's. Then said he to himself, "O ill-omened diversion! What have I done with such unlucky disport that I have looked upon this marvel and wonder of wonderments, only to become a woman. [262] Verily we are Allah's, and unto Him shall we return;" adding as he took thought of the matter and of what had befallen him, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great."

Presently a Fisherman approached him and sighting a fair girl said, "This is none other than a blessed day which Allah has opened to us with a beautiful maiden for quarry; and she is doubtless of the Daughters of the Deep, whom Allah Almighty has sent to us that I may espouse her to my son." Hearing these words, the transformed man said to himself, "Now after being a Wazir I have become a woman and this is for that as tit for tat, [263] and the fellow furthermore desires to see me married, and as for the Caliph and the kingdom and the countries, who shall now be able to offer them counsel?" But the Fisherman who for his joyance had no stomach to ply his pursuit, as was his custom, forthwith arose and taking with him the Daughter of the Deep led her to his house, and on entering the door cried aloud to his wife, "This day has been a lucky for my fishing craft: during all these years it never befell me to happen upon a Mermaid save on this best-omened of all the days, adding, "Where is your son, to whom Allah has sent this Daughter of the Daughters of the Main; and has made her his portion and vouchsafed her to his service? for 'tis my design to marry them."

Replied the woman, "He has taken the beasts and has fared forth to pasture it and plough therewith; but right soon will he return. [264] And while they were thus conversing the youth came forward, and the Wazir on sighting him groaned and cried, Well-away for me! this very night I shall become a bride for this blamed lad [265] to sleep withal. And if I say to them, 'What intent have you? You are in meanness and misery [266] while I am Wazir to the Caliph;' they will never believe me for that I have become a woman, and all thereto appertaining now belongs to me. Alack and alas for that I did with mine own self; indeed what business had I with such diversion?"

Hereupon the fisherman called out, "O my son, up with you and straightway take this Mermaid and marry her and abate her pucelage and be blessed with her and enjoy your joy with her during all the days of your lifetime: doubtless, O my child, you are in all boon fortune, seeing that what good befell you never betided any before you nor will become the lot of one after you." So the youth arose and for his delight hardly believing in his conquest, married her and lay with her and did away her maidenhead and on that very night she conceived by him. After nine months she bare him issue and the couple ceased not to be after this fashion till she had become a mother of seven.

But the Wazir, of his stress and excess of the trouble and the travail he endured, said to himself, "How long shall last this toil and torment wherewith I am liver-smitten and that too by mine own consent? So e'en will I arise and go to this sea and hurl myself thereinto and whatever shall become of me let it be: perhaps I may find rest from these torments into which I have fallen." And immediately he arose and sought the shore and did as he had devised, when a wave enveloped him and cast him deep into the depths and he was like to choke, when suddenly his head protruded from the chauldron and he was seated as before he had ducked it. Hereupon he saw the Caliph sitting in state with the Sage by his side and all the Lords of the land and the Notables of the commons awaiting the end of his adventure.

So he gazed at them and showed a smiling face [267] and laughed aloud when the Prince of True Believers asked him saying, "What have you seen, O Wazir?" So he repeated to the Sovran all he had sighted and everything that had come down upon his head, presently adding, "O Caliph of the Age and the sum and substance of the Time and the Tide, what are these marvels wrought by this Sage? Verily I have beheld the gardens of Paradise [268] with maidens of the Húr and the youths of Heaven, and wonderments galore unlooked upon by mankind at all, at all. But, if you be pleased, O Commander of the Faithful, to espy these rare spectacles and marvellous conditions with your own eyes, deign go down into the water; so shall you divert yourself with peregrine matters and adventures seldom-seen."

The Sultan, delighted at this suggestion arose and doffed his dress; then, girding his loins with a zone, he entered the cauldron whereat the Sage cried out to him, "O my lord, sit you down and duck your head." But when this was done the Caliph found himself in a bottomless sea and wide dispread and never at rest by any manner of means, so he fell to swimming therein, when a huge breaker threw him high ashore and he walked up the beach mother-naked save for his zone. So he said in his mind, "Let me see what has been wrought with me by the Sage and the Wazir who have thus practiced upon me and have cast me in this place; and perhaps they have married my daughter to the youth, and they have stolen my kingdom, the Sage becoming Sultan in my stead. And now let me ask myself, 'What had I to do with such damned diversion as this?'"

But as he brooded over these thoughts and the like of them behold, a bevy of maidens came forwards to fill their pitchers from a fountain and a pool of sweet water lying beside the sea; and sighting him they exclaimed, "You, who are you? say sooth are you of man-kind or rather perhaps of Jinn-kind?" He replied, "I am a mortal and of the noblest-born; withal I am a stranger in the land and I know not where I should wend." "Of what country are you?" asked they, and he answered, "I am from Baghdad." "Up with you," said one of the damsels, "to yonder knoll, then down to the flat on the further side, and you shall sight a city whose name is 'Omán, [269] whereinto do you enter."

The Caliph did her bidding, and no sooner had the people seen him stripped than they said one to other, "This man is a merchant who has been shipwrecked;" so they gave him by way of almsgift a Tobe [270] all tattered and torn wherewith he veiled his shame. And after so doing he fell to wandering about the city for pastime, and while walking about he passed into a Bazar and there sighted a cook, before whom he stood open mouthed (for indeed famine had thinned him), and he bethought him of what to do, and he knew not how to act. However the cook at first sight was certified of his being a foreigner, and perhaps a shipwrecked mariner so he asked him, "O my brother, why do you not come in and sit you down, for you are a stranger and without means; so in the way of Allah I would engage your services and will pay you daily two dirhams to provide you with meat and drink." Answered the Caliph, "Hearing and obeying," after which he abode with the cook and served him and stinted not to serve him for a long time, saying in himself the while, "This for that is tit for tat! and after the Caliphate and commandment and happiness and honor, this day are you left to lick the platters. What had I to do with such diversion as this? Withal 'tis fairer than the spectacle that anyone even my Wazir ever saw and the more excellent, for that I after being the Caliph of the Age, and the choice gift of the Time and Tide have now become the hireling of a cook. Would to Heaven I knew the sin which brought me hereto?" [271]

Now as he abode with the cook it befell him that one day he threaded the Jewellers' Bazar; for about that city was a sea-site whereinto the duckers and divers went down and whence they brought up pearls and corals and precious stones; and as he stood in the market-place, said he to himself, "Let me here become a broker in this market street and find rest from my groaning in labour and my licking of platters." As soon as morning morrowed he did on such wise, when suddenly a merchant approached him, holding in hand a costly gem whose light burned like a lamp or rather like a ray of sunshine, and 'twas worth the tribute of Egypt and Syria. Hereat the Caliph marvelled with exceeding marvel, and said he to the trader, "Tell me, will you sell this jewel?" and said the other, "Yes." So the Sultan taking it from him went about with it among the merchants, who seeing and considering it, wondered greatly at its beauty. Accordingly they bid for it fifty thousand diners, but the royal broker ceased not to bear it about and the buyers to increase their biddings till they offered a hundred thousand gold pieces.

Thereupon the Caliph returned with it to the owner and accosted him saying, "Will you sell it for the sum named?" and when the merchant consented, he continued, "I now go to receive its price, wherewith I will come back to you." Then the broker went up to the buyer and said, "Bring hither its value and set it in my hand;" but the man asked him, "Where is its owner?" and the Caliph answered, "Its owner has commissioned me to receive its price, after which he will come and recover the same from me." However the bidder retorted, "This is not fitting nor is it according to Holy Law: do you bring me its owner; then come and let him pouch the price, for 'tis he has sold it to me and you are only our agent." Hereupon the Caliph went forth to seek the proprietor and wandered about a long while without finding him; after which he again accosted the purchaser, and said to him, "I am the rightful proprietor: place the price in my hand." The buyer arose to pay his debt, but before so doing he considered the jewel and saw that it was a bit of dark Sandarach; [272] whereat he was sore perplexed and cried out to the Caliph, "O Satan, cost you palm off false wares, the market-place of the merchants being under the orders of the Sultan?"

But when the traders heard these words, they flocked around the pretended broker and having seized him they pinioned his elbows and dragged him before the Sovran of that city who, when they set the prisoner before him, asked, "What is the offence of this man?" "O our honored lord," answered they, "this fellow palms off false wares and swindles the traders in the royal Bazar." So the King commanded them to hang him, whereat they charged his neck with chains and bared his head, and bade the cryer cry, "This is his award and the least of awards who forges counterfeits and who tricks the merchant folk in the market-place of the Sultan." Hereat said the Caliph to himself, "I was not content with platter licking, which now appears to me a mighty pleasant calling but e'en I must become a broker and die sus. per coll. This is for that tit for tat; however, scant blame to the Time which has charged me with this work."

Now when they brought him to the hanging place and threw the loop around his neck and fell to hoisting him up, as he rose from the ground his eyes were opened and he found himself emerging from the chauldron, while the Wazir and the Sage and the youth were sitting and considering him. And the Minister catching sight of his lord sprang to his feet and kissed ground before him, and laughed aloud, and the Commander of the Faithful asked him, "Why this laughter?" Answered he, "O you, the Prince of True Believers and God-guarded Sovran, my laughter and my gladness are for myself, seeing that I have recovered my identity after becoming a woman and being wedded to a ploughman, who eared the ground, and after bearing to him seven babes."

Cried the Caliph, "Woe to you, O dog, O son of a dog, you were married and rejoiced in children, whereas I this very moment from the hanging-place have come down." Then he informed the Wazir of all that had befallen him and the Minister did on like guise, whereat all those present laughed consumedly and marvelled at the words of the Warlock, and his proficiency in occult knowledge. Then the Kazi and witnesses were summoned with their writing gear and were bidden draw up the marriage-contract of the young Cook and the Caliph's daughter. After this the Sage sojourned with the Commander of the Faithful in highmost degree and most honorable dignity, and they abode eating and drinking and living the most delectable of lives and the most enjoyable with all manner of joy and jollity, till came to them the Destroyer of delights and the Divider of man's days and they departed life one and all.

FINIS.


The Pleasant History of the Cock and the Fox


Here we begin to indite the pleasant History which beset between the Cock and the Fox. [273]

It is said that there abode in such a village a man who was a Shaykh of long standing, one gifted with fair counsel and right understanding. Now he had on his farm a plenty of poultry, male and female, and these he was wont to breed and to eat of their eggs and their chickens. But among his cocks was a Chanticleer, well advanced of age and wily of wit, who had long fought with Fortune and who had become wise and ware in worldly matters and in the turns and shifts of Time. It fortuned one day that this Cock went forth to wander about the farm-lands pecking and picking up as he went such grains of wheat and barley and holcus [274] and sesame and millet as chanced fall in his way; but, being careless of himself, he had left the village afar off without thinking of what he did, and before he took counsel with himself he found him amiddlemost the wilderness. So he turned him rightwards and leftwards but espied neither friend nor familiar, whereat he stood perplext as to his affair and his breast was straitened and still he knew not what to do. Now while thus bewildered in his wits touching his next step, behold, his glance fell upon a Fox [275] who was approaching him from afar, whereat he feared and trembled and was agitated with mighty great agitation. At once he turned him about and presently espied a high wall arising from the waste, whereto was no place of ascending for his foe; so he spread his wings and flew up and perched upon the coping where he took his station.

Presently the Fox came forward to the foot of the wall, and, finding no means of climbing it and getting at the fowl, he raised his head and said, "Peace be upon you, Ho you the soothfast brother and suitable friend!" But as the Cock would not turn towards him nor return anything of reply to his salutation, the Fox resumed, "What is to do with you, O my dear brother, that my greeting you acknowledge not and to my words incline you not?" Still the Cock requited not his courtesy and declined to reply, whereat the Fox resumed, "Know you not, O my brother, the glad tidings wherewith I came towards you, with what suitable intelligence and counsel veridical and information at once sincere and self-evident? and, did know what it is has come to mine ears, verily you had embraced me and kissed me on the mouth."

But the Cock feigned absence of mind and ignored him and answered him nothing, but stood with rounded eyes and fixed upon the far when the Fox resumed, "O my brother, the King of the Beasts which be the Lion and the King of the Birds which is the Eagle have alighted from a journey upon the meads where grass is a-growing and by the marge where waters are a-flowing and blossoms are a-blowing and browsing gazelles are a-to-ing and a-fro-ing; and the two have gathered together all manner of ferals, lions and hyenas, leopards and lynxes, wild cattle and antelopes and jackals and even hares, in brief, all the wild beasts of the world; and they have also collected every kind of bird, eagle and vulture, crow and raven, [276] wild pigeon and turtledove, poultry and fowls and Katás and quails [277] and other small deer, and these two liege lords have bidden the herald proclaim, throughout the tracts of the upland wold and the wild lowland, safety and security and confraternity and peace with honor and sympathy and familiar friendship and affection and love among wild beasts and cattle and birds; also that enmity be done away with and wrongs be forbidden nor might one transgress against other; nay, if any chance to injure his fellow this offence might be for his scourging a reason, and for his death by tearing to pieces a justification. The order has also come forth that all do feed and browse in one place whichever they please, never venturing to break the peace but dwelling in all amity and affection and intimacy one with other. Moreover they have commissioned me, very me, to roam over the wastes and gladden with good tidings the peoples of the wilds and proclaim that one and all without exception must assemble together, and also that whoever delays or refuses obedience shall not escape punishment [278] nor let each and every fail to make act of presence and to kiss hands. And of you, O my brother, I especially require that you descend from your high stead in safety and security and satisfaction, and that henceforward your heart be not startled nor your limbs shake for fear."

All this description was described by the Fox to the Cock who paid no heed to him as though he had never heard the news; and he remained silent without return of reply or without so much as turning to regard him; nay, he only kept his head raised and gazed afar. Hereat said to him the Fox (for indeed his heart burned with desire to know how he could seize and devour him), "O brother mine, why and wherefore do you not acknowledge me by an answer or address to me a word or even turn your face towards me who am a Commissioner sent by Leo, Sovran of the beasts, and Aquila, Sultan of the birds? Sore I fear lest you refuse to accompany me and thus come upon you censure exceeding and odium excessive seeing that all are assembled in the presence and are browsing upon the verdant mead." Then he added (as Chanticleer regarded him not), "O my brother, I bespeak you and you unheed me and my speech and, if you refuse to fare with me, at least let me know what may be your reply."

Hereupon the Cock inclined towards him and said, "Sooth have you spoken, O my brother, and well I know you be an Envoy and a Commissioner from our King, and the special Messenger of him: but my condition is changed by that which has befallen me." "And what calamity, O my brother has betided you?" "Do you espy what I am at present espying?" "And what is it you espy?" "Verily, I see a dust cloud lowering and the Saker-falcons in circles towering;" and said the Fox (whose heart throbbed with fear), "Look straitly, O my brother, lest there happen to us a mishap." So Chanticleer gazed as one distraught for a full told hour, after which he turned to the Fox and said, "O my brother, I behold and can distinguish a bird flying and a dust-trail hieing." "Consider them narrowly, O my brother," cried the Fox (whose side-muscles quivered) "lest this be sign of greyhound;" and the other replied, "The Truth is known to Allah alone, yet I seem now to see a something lengthy of leg, lean of flank, loose of ears, fine of forehand and full of quarter, and at this moment it draws near and is well nigh upon us—O fine!" [279] Now when the Fox heard these words he cried to the Cock, "O my brother, I must farewell you!" and so saying he arose and committed his legs to the wind and he had recourse to the Father of Safety. [280]

Seeing this, the Cock also cried, "Why thus take to flight when you have no spoiler your heart to affright?" Replied the Fox, "I have a fear of the Greyhound, O my brother, for that he is not of my friends or of my familiars;" and the Cock rejoined, "Did you not tell me you came as Commissioner of the Kings to these wastes proclaiming a peace and safety among all the beasts and the birds?" "O my brother Chanticleer," retorted the other, "this feral, called Greyhound, was not present at the time when pacifcation was proclaimed, nor was his name announced in the Congress of the beasts; and I for my part have no love lost with him, nor between me and him is there anything of security." So saying the Fox turned immediately to fly, routed with the foulest of routing, and the Cock escaped the foe by his sleight and sagacity with perfect safety and security.

Now after the Fox had turned tail and fled from him, Chanticleer came down from the wall and regained his farm, lauding Allah Almighty who had conveyed him unharmed to his own place. And here he related unto his fellows what had befallen him with the Fox and how he had devised that cunning device and thereby freed himself from a strait wherein, but for it, the foe had torn him limb by limb.

FINIS.


History of What Befel the Fowl-let with the Fowler


Here we begin to invite the History of what befell the Fowl-let from the Fowler. [281]

They relate (but Allah is All-knowing) that there abode in Baghdad-city a huntsman-fellow in venerie trained aright. Now one day he went forth to the chase taking with him nets and springes and other gear he needed and fared to a garden-site with trees bedight and branches interlaced tight in which all the fowls did unite; and arriving at a tangled copse he planted his trap in the ground and he looked around for a hiding-place and took seat therein concealed. Suddenly a Birdie approaching the trap-side began scraping the earth and, wandering round about it, fell to saying to himself, "What may this be? Would Heaven I lnew, for it seems nothing save a marvellous creation of Allah!" Presently he considered the decoy which was half buried in the ground and salam'd to it from afar to the far and the Trap returned his salutation, adding thereto, "And the pity of Allah and His blessings;" and presently pursued, "Welcome and fair welcome to the brother dear and the friend sincere and the companionable fere and the kindly compeer, why stand from me so far when I desire you become my neighbour near and I become of your intimates the faithful and of your comrades the truthful? So draw you nigh to me and be of your safety trustful and prove you not of me fearful."

Said the Fowl-let, "I beseech you by Allah, tell me who are you so I may not of you feel affright and what be your bye-name and your name and to which of the tribes do trace your tree?" And said the Trap, "My name is Hold-fast [282] and my patronymic is Bindfast and my tribe is named the Sons of Fallfast." Replied the Birdie, "Sooth you say; for such name is truly your name and such bye-name is without question your bye-name nor is there any doubt of your tribe being the noblest of the tribes." The Trap answered him saying, "Alhamdolillah—laud to the Lord—that you have recognised me and that I am of your truest friends you have acknowledged, for where shall you find a familiar like unto me, a lover soothful and truthful and my fellow in mind? And indeed I a devotee of religious bent and from vain gossip and acquaintances and even kith and kin abstinent; nor have I any retreat save upon the heads of hills and in the bellies of dales which be long and deep; and from mundane tidings I am the true Holdfast and in worldly joys the real Bindfast."

The Fowl replied, "Sooth have spoken, O my lord; and all hail to you; how pious and religious and of morals and manners gracious art thou? Would to Heaven I were a single hair upon your body." Rejoined the Trap, "Thou in this world art my brother and in the next world my father;" and the other retorted, "O my brother, fain would I question you concerning matters concealed within your thoughts;" whereto the Trap, "Enquire of whatever you requires", that I make manifest to you what in heart you desirest; for I will truly declare to you mine every aim and disclose to you soothly all my case and my thoughts concealed, nor shall remain unrevealed of mine intent aught." So the Birdie began, "O my brother, why and wherefore see I you on this wise abiding in the dust and dwelling afar from relations and companeers and you have parted from your family and peers and have departed from the fondness of your dears?" "Hast you not learned, O my brother," answered the Trap, "that retirement is permanent heal and farness from folk doth blessings deal and separation from the world is bodily weal; and on this matter has one of the poets said, and said right well,

'Fly folk, in public ne'er appearing, * And men shall name you
man God-fearing; [283]
Nor say I've brother, mate and friend: * Try men with mind still
persevering:
Yea, few are they as you couldst wish: * Scorpions they prove
when most endearing.' [284]

And one of the Sages has said, 'Solitude and not ill associate.' Also said they to Al-Bahlúl, [285] 'Why this tarrying of your amid the homes of the dead and why this sojourning in a barren stead and wherefore this farness from kinsmen and mate and lack of neighbourly love for brother and intimate?' But said he, 'Woe to you! my folk did I dwell among them would some day unlove me and the while I abide far from them will never reprove me; not indeed would they remember my affection nor would they desire my predilection; and so satisfied with my solitude am I that an I saw my family I should start away as in fear of them, and were my parent quickened anew and longed for my society verily I would take flight from them.' "

Replied the Fowl-let, "In good sooth, O my brother, truth you have pronounced in all by you announced and the best of rede did from you proceed; but tell me, prithee, about that cord about your middle wound and despite your expending efforts that abound why you art neither a-standing nor a-sitting on ground?" To him replied the Trap, "O my brother, learn that I spend every night of every month in prayer, during which exercise whenever sleep would seize me I tighten this cord about my waist and drive slumber from my eyes and become therefrom the more wide-awake for my orisons. Know you also that Allah (be He glorified and magnified!) affectioneth his servants when devout are they, and stand in worship alway, ever dight to pray and praise Him by night and by day; and who turn on their sides loving the Lord to obey in desire and dismay and doling their good away. And said Allah (be He glorified and magnified!), 'And for scanty while of the night they take not gentle rest and at rising morn His pardon they obtest and their Lord granteth unto them their request.' [286] And wottest you not, O my brother, what said the poet?

'These busy are with worldly gear * Those of their moneys proud
appear:
But some be rich by God's approof — * Praise Him o' nights with
love sincere:
Their Guardian's eye regards them aye * Praying, confessing sins
to clear:
They wot nor worship anything but Him * And hail His name with love
and fear.' "

Therewith said the Fowl-let, "Sooth have you said, O my brother, in each word by you sped and right eloquently was announced all by you pronounced; however (I am your protected!), do you tell me why I see you one half buried in earth and the other half above ground?" And said the Trap, "For the reason that I thereby resemble the dead and in life I am shunning the pernicious lusts of the flesh; and Almighty Allah (be He glorified and magnified!) said in His August Volume, 'From earth have We created you and unto her We will return you and from her will We draw you forth a second time.' " [287] Replied the Birdie, "The truth you have told in whatever you dost unfold, but why do I see you so bent of back?" and rejoined the Trap, "Learn, O my brother, that the cause for this bowing of my back is my frequent standing in prayer by day and my upstanding by night in the service of the King, the Clement, the One, the Prepotent, the Glorious, the Omnipotent; and verily upon this matter right well the poet has spoken,

'None save the pious Youth gains boon of Paradise * (To whom the
Lord doth pardon crime and sin and vice), Whose back by constant prayer through
murk o' night is bent * And
longs to merit Heaven in sore and painful guise. Hail to the slave who ever would
his lord obey * And who by death
is saved when he obedient dies.' "

The Fowl-let continued, "O my brother, of truth the token is that whereof you have spoken and I have understood you and am certified of your sooth. But yet, I see upon you a robe [288] of hair!" and the Trap rejoined, "O my brother, know you not of hair and wool that they be the wear of the pious and the religious, whereof one of the poets has spoken in these words,

'Folk who in fear of long accompt [289] for nothing of worldly
care * Hail to them! perhaps garb of wool they'll change for
silken wear:
In life for provaunt shall suffice them salt and barley bread *
Who seek th' Almighty Lord and bow the head in sedulous
pray'r.' "

The Birdie resumed, "In very deed your speech the sooth doth teach; but say me what be this staff [290] you hendest in hand?" Replied the Trap, "O my brother, know that I have become an olden man well shotten in years and my strength is minished, wherefor I have taken me a staff that I may prop me on it and that it aid my endeavour when a-fasting." The Fowl-let pursued, "Thy speech is true, O my brother, and you speakest as due, yet would I ask you of a matter nor refuse me information thereanent: tell me why and wherefore this plenty of grain scattered all about you?" The Trap answered, "Indeed the merchants and men of wealth bring to me this victual that I may bestow it in charity upon the Fakir and the famisht;" and the Birdie rejoined, "O my brother, I also am an hungered; so dost you enjoin me to eat thereof?" "Thou art my companion," cried the Trap, "so upon me such injunction is a bounden duty," presently adding, "Be so kind, O my brother, and haste you hither and eat."

Hereat the Fowl-let flew down from off his tree and approaching little by little (with a heart beating for fear of the Trap) picked up a few grains which lay beside it until he came to the corn set in the loop of the springe. Hereupon he pecked at it with one peck nor had he gained anything of good therefrom before the Trap came down heavily upon him and entangled his neck and held him fast. Hereupon he was seized with a fit of sore affright and he cried out, "Zík! zík!" and "Mík! mík! [291] Verily I have fallen into wreak and am betrayed by friendly freke and oh, the excess of my trouble and tweak, Zík, Zík! O you who keenest my case, do you enable me escape to seek, and save me from these straits unique and be you ruthful to me the meek!" Thereupon said to him the Trap, "Thou criest out Zik! Zik! and have fallen into straits unique and have strayed from the way did seek, O Miscreant and Zindík, [292] and nothing shall avail you at this present or brother or friend veridigue or familiar freke. Now understand and your pleasure seek! I have deceived you with a deceit and you lentest ear and lustedst."

Replied the Bird, "I am one whom desire has cast down and ignorance has seduced and inordinate greed, one for whose neck the collar of destruction is fitted and I have fallen along with those who lowest fall!" Hereupon the Fowler came up with his knife to slaughter the Fowl-let and began saying, "How many a birdie have we taken in all ease for desire of its meat that we may dress their heads with rice or in Harísah [293] or fried in pan and eat thereof pleasurably myself or feed with it great men and grandees. Also 'tis on us incumbent to feed privily upon half the bodies and the other half shall be for our guests while I will take the wings to set before my family and kinsmen as the most excellent of gifts." [294] Hearing these words the Bird fell to speaking and saying,

"O Birder, my mother's in misery * And blind with weeping my loss
is she.
I suffice not your guest nor can serve for gift: * Have pity and
compassion and set me free!
With my parents I'll bless you and then will I * Fly a-morn and
at e'en-tide return to you."

Presently resumed he, "Seest you not how my meat be mean and my maw be lean; nor verily can I stand you in stead of cate nor your hunger satiate: so fear Allah and set me at liberty then shall the Almighty requite you with an abundant requital." But the Fowler, far from heeding his words, made him over to his son saying, "O my child, take this bird and faring homewards slaughter him and of him cook for us a cumin ragout and a lemonstew, a mess flavored with verjuice and a second of mushrooms and a third with pomegranate seeds and a fourth of clotted curd [295] cooked with Summák, [296] and a fine fry and eke conserves of pears [297] and quinces and apples and apricots hight the rose-water and vermicelli [298] and Sikbáj; [299] and meat dressed with the six leaves and a porridge [300] and a rice-milk, and an 'Ajíjíyah [301] and fried flesh in strips and Kabábs and meat-olives and dishes the like of these. Also do you make of his guts strings for bows and of his gullet a conduit for the terrace-roof and of his skin a tray-cloth and of his plumage cushions and pillows."

Now when the Fowl-let heard these words (and he was still in the Fowler's hand), he laughed a laugh of sorrow and cried, "Woe to you, O Birder, where be wended your wits and your understanding? Art Jinn-mad or wine-drunken? Art age-foolish or asleep? Art heavy-minded or remiss in thought? Indeed had I been that long-necked bird the 'Anká, daughter of Life, or were I the she-camel of Sálih to be, or the ram of Isaac the sacrificed, or the loquent calf of Al-Sámiri [302] or even a buffalo fattened daintily all this by you mentioned had never come from me." Hereat he fell to improvising and saying,

"The Ruthful forbiddeth the eating of me * And His Grace doth
grace me with clemency:
A Camel am I whom they overload * And the Birder is daft when my
flesh seeth he:
From Solomon's breed, O my God, I have hope: * If he kill me the
Ruthful his drowning [303] decree.'?

Then said the Fowl to the Fowler, "An you design to slaughter me in your greed even as you have described, verily I shall avail you nothing, but an you work my weal and set me free I will show you somewhat shall profit you and further the fortunes of your sons' sons and your latest descendants." "What is that direction you would deal to me?" asked the Fowler, and answered the Fowl-let, "I will teach a trio of words all wise and will discover to you in this earth a Hoard wherewith you and your seed and posterity shall ever be satisfied and shall ever pray for the lengthening of my years. Moreover I will point out to you a pair of Falcons ashen-grey, big of body and burly of bulk who are to me true friends and whom you did leave in the gardens untrapped." Asked the Birder, "And what be the three words which so savour of wisdom?" and answered the other "O Fowler, the three words of wisdom are:—Bemourn not what is the past nor at the future rejoice too fast nor believe anything save that whereon your glance is cast. But as regards the Hoard and the two Falcons, when you shall have released me I will point them out to you and right soon to you shall be shown the sooth of whatever I have said to you."

Hereat the Birder's heart became well affected toward the Birdie for his joy about the Treasure and the Falcons; and the device of the captive deceived the Capturer and cut short his wits so that he at once released the prey. Forthright the Fowl-let flew forth the Fowler's palm in huge delight at having saved his life from death; then, after preening his plume and spreading his pinions and his wings, he laughed until he was like to fall earthwards in a fainting fit Anon he began to gaze right and left, long breaths a drawing and increase of gladness ever a showing; whereupon said the Birder, "O Father of Flight, O you The Wind hight! what saidst you to me about pointing out the two Falcons ashen-grey and who were the comrades you leftest in the gardens?" Said the Birdie in reply, "slack and alas! never saw I your like for an ass nor anything than yourself meaner of capacity nor mightier of imbecility; for indeed you carries" in your head lightness and in your wits slackness. O Scant of Sense, when saw you ever a sparrow company with a Falcon, much less with two Falcons? So short is your understanding that I have escaped your hand by devising the simplest device which my nous and knowledge suggested." Hereat he began to improvis and repeat:

"When Fortune easy was, from duty [304] did forbear * Nor
from that malady [305] have safety or repair: Then blame yourself nor cast on other
wight [306] the fault *
And lacking all excuse to death of misery fare!"

Then resumed the Fowl-let, "Woe to you, O mean and mesquin you wottedst not that which you have lost in me, for indeed baulked is your bent and foiled is your fortune and near to you is poverty and nigh to you is obscurity. Hadst you when taking me cut my throat and cloven my crop you had found therein a jewel the weight of an ounce which I picked up and swallowed from the treasury of Kisrà Anúshírwán the King." But when the Birder heard the Birdie's words he scattered dust upon his head and buffeted his face and plucked out his beard and rent his raiment, and at last slipped down a swooning to the ground. And presently recovering his senses he looked towards his late captive and cried, "O Father of Flight, O you The Wind hight say me is there any return for you me-wards, where you shall with me abide, and you within the apple of mine eye will I hide, and after all this toil and turmoil I will perfume and fumigate you with ambergris and with Comorin lign-aloes, and I will bring you sugar for food and nuts of the pine [307] and with me you shall tarry in highmost degree?"

Replied the Birdie, "O miserable, past is that which passed; I mean, suffice me not your fraud and your flattering falsehood. And laud to the Lord, O you meanest of men, how soon have you forgotten the three charges wherewith I charged you! And how short are your wits seeing that the whole of me weighteth not ten drachms [308] and how then can I bear in crop a jewel weighing an ounce? How far from you is subtilty and how speedily have you forgotten mine injunctions wherewith I enjoined you saying, 'Believe not anything save that whereon your eye is cast nor regret and bemourn the past nor at what comes rejoice too fast.' These words of wisdom are clean gone from your memory, and had you been nimble of wits you had slaughtered me forthright: however, Alhamdolillah—Glory to God, who caused me not to savour the whittle's sharp edge, and I thank my Lord for my escape and for the loosing of my prosperity from the trap of trouble." Now when the Birder heard these words of the Birdie he repented and regretted his folly, and he cried, "O my sorrow for what failed me of the slaughter of this volatile," and as he sank on the ground he sang, [309]

"O brave was the boon which I held in my right * Yet O Maker of
man, 'twas in self despight.
Had my lot and my luck been of opulence, * This emptiness never
had proved my plight."

Hereupon the Fowl-let farewelled the Fowler and took flight until he reached his home and household, where he seated him and recited all that had befallen him with the Birder, to wit, how the man had captured him, and how he had escaped by sleight, and he fell to improvising,

"I charged you, O brood of my nestlings, and said, * Ware yon
Wady, nor seek to draw near a stead
Where sitteth a man who with trap and with stakes * Entrapped me,
drew knife and would do me dead.
And he longed to destroy me, O children, but I * Was saved by the
Lord and to you was sped."

And here endeth the History of the Fowl let and the Fowler entire and complete.

M.


The Tale of Attaf


Here we begin to write and invite the Tale of a man of Syria, named Attaf. [310]

They relate (but Allah is All-knowing of His unknown and All-cognisant of what forewent in the annals of folk and the wonders of yore, and of times long gone before!) that in the city of Sham [311] there dwelt of old a man named Attáf, who rivalled Hátim of Tayy [312] in his generosity and his guest-love and in his self-control as to manners and morals. Now he lived in the years when the Caliph Harun al-Rashid was reigning in Baghdad-city, and it happened on a day of the days that this Commander of the Faithful awoke morne and melancholic, and right straitened was his breast.

So he arose, and taking Ja'afar the Barmecide and Mastur the Eunuch passed with them into the place where his treasures were stored. Presently said he to the Wazir, "O Ja'araf, open to me this door that I may solace me with the sight, and my breast may be broadened and perhaps be gladdened by such spectacle." The Minister did the bidding of his lord, who, finding a room full of books, put forth his hand, and taking up one of the volumes, opened and read. Then he fell to weeping thrice, and thrice to laughing aloud, [313] whereat the Wazir considered him and cried, "O King of the Age, how is it I espy you reading and weeping and laughing at one and the same moment when none so act save madmen and maniacs?" [314]

And having spoken on this wise he held his peace; but the Prince of True Believers turned himwards and cried, "O dog of the sons of Bermak, I see you going beyond your degree and quitting the company of sensible men, and you speak vainly making me a madman in saying, 'None laugh and cry at one and the same time save maniacs?'" With these words the Caliph restored the volume to its place in the Treasury and bade lock the door, after which the three returned to the Divan. Here the Commander of the Faithful regarded Ja'afar and exclaimed, "Go you forth from before me and address me not again nor seat you upon the Wazirial seat until you answer your own question and you return me a reply concerning that which is writ and aligned in yonder book I was reading, to the end you learn why I wept and wherefore I laughed at one and the same hour." And he cried at him in anger saying, "Off and away with you, nor face me again save with the answer, else will I slay you with the foulest of slaughter."

Accordingly Ja'afar fared forth and hardly could he see with his eyes, and he kept saying to himself, "Indeed I have fallen with a sore fall; foul befall it for a fall; how fulsome it is!" Then he fared homewards where he encountered face to face his father Yahyá the Bermaki, who was issuing from the mansion and he recounted to him the tale, whereat his parent said, "Go at once, abide not here, but turn you Damascus-wards until shall terminate this decline of fortune and this disjunciton of favour, and at the ending thereof you shall see wonders therein." [315] Ja'afar replied, "Not until I shall have laid a charge upon my Harím;" [316] but Yahya cried, "Enter not these doors, go at once to Al-Shám, for even so 'tis determined by Destiny."

Accordingly the Wazir gave ear to his sire, and taking a bag containing one thousand dinars and slinging on his sword farewelled him; then, mounting a she-mule, alone and unattended by slave or page, he rode off and he ceased not riding for ten days full-told until he arrived at the Marj [317] or mead of Damascus. Now it so fortuned that on that same day Attaf, [318] a fair youth and a well-known of the "Smile of the Prophet," and one of the noblest and most generous of her sons, had pitched tents and had spread a banquet outside the city, where chancing to sight Ja'afar mounted on his beast, he knew him to be a wayfarer passing by, and said to his slaves, "Call to me yonder man!" They did his bidding and the stranger rode up to the party of friends, and dismounting from his mule saluted them with the salam which they all returned. Then they sat for a while [319] after which Attaf arose and led Ja'afar to his house companied by all the company which was there and they paced into a spacious open hall and seated themselves in converse for an hour full-told. Then the slaves brought them to a table spread with the evening meal and bearing more than ten several manners of meat. So they ate and were cheered, and after the guests had washed hands, the eunuchs and attendants brought in candles of honey-colored wax that shed a brilliant light, and presently the musicians came in band and performed a right royal partition while the servants served up conserves for dessert. So they ate, and when they had eaten their sufficiency they drank coffee; [320] and finally, at their ease and in their own good time, all the guests arose and made obeisance and fared homewards.

Then Attaf and Ja'afar sat at table for an hour or so, during which the host offered his guest a hundred greetings, saying, "All kinds of blessings have descended from Heaven upon our heads. Tell me, how was it you honored us, and what was the cause of your coming and of your favouring us with your footsteps?" [321] So Ja'afar disclosed to him his name and office [322] and told him the reasons of his ride to Damascus from the beginning to the end full and detailed, whereto Attaf rejoined, "Tarry with me if you please a decade of years; and grieve not at all, for your Worship is owner of this place." After this the eunuchs came in and spread for Ja'afar bedding delicately wrought at the head of the hall and its honor-stead, and disposed other sleeping-gear alongside thereof, which seeing the Wazir said to himself, "Haply my host is a bachelor, that they would spread his bed to my side; however, I will venture the question." Accordingly he addressed his host saying, "O Attaf, are you single or married?" [323] "I am married, O my lord," said the other, whereat Ja'afar resumed, "Wherefore do you not go within and lie with your Harím?" "O my lord," replied Attaf, "the Harím is not about to take flight, and it would be nothing but disgraceful to me were I to leave a visitor like yourself, a man by all revered, to sleep alone while I fare tonight with my Harím and rise betimes to enter the Hammam. [324] In me such action would I deem be want of courtesy and failure in honoring a magnifico like your Honour. In very sooth, O my lord, so long as your presence deign favour this house I will not sleep within my Harem until I farewell your Worship and you depart in peace and safety to your own place." "This is a marvellous matter," said Ja'afar to himself, "and peradventure he so does the more to make much of me."

So they lay together that night and when morning morrowed they arose and fared to the Baths where Attaf had sent for the use of his guest a suit of magnificent clothes, and caused Ja'afar don it before leaving the Hammam. Then finding the horses at the door, they mounted and repaired to the Lady's Tomb, [325] and spent a day worthy to be numbered in men's lives. Nor did they cease visiting place after place by day and sleeping in the same stead by night, in the way we have described, for the space of four months, after which time the soul of the Wazir Ja'afar waxed sad and sorry, and one chance day of the days, he sat him down and wept. Seeing him in tears Attaf asked him, saying, "Allah fend from you all affliction, O my lord! why do you weep and wherefore are you grieved? If you be heavy of heart why not relate to me what has oppressed you?" Answered Ja'afar, "O my brother, I find my breast sore straitened and I would fain stroll about the streets of Damascus and solace me from seeing the Cathedral-mosque of the Ommiades." [326] "And who, O my lord," responded the other, "would hinder you therefrom? Do you deign wander where you will and take your solace, so may your spirits be gladdened and your breast be broadened. Herein is none to let or stay you at all, at all." Hearing these words Ja'afar arose to fare forth, when said his host, "O my lord, shall they saddle you a hackney?" but the other replied, "O my friend, I would not be mounted for that the man on horseback may not divert himself by seeing the folk; nay the folk enjoy themselves by looking upon him." Said Attaf, "At least delay you a while that I may supply you with spending money to bestow upon the folk; and then fare forth and walk about to your content and solace yourself with seeing whatever you wilt; so may you be satisfied and no more be sorrowed."

Accordingly, Ja'afar took from Attaf a purse of three hundred dinars and left the house gladly as one who issues from durance vile, and he turned into the city and began a-wandering about the streets of Damascus and enjoying the spectacle; and at last he entered the Jámi' al-Amawi where he prayed the usual prayers. After this he resumed his strolling about pleasant places until he came to a narrow street and found a bench formed of stone [327] set in the ground. Hereon he took seat to rest a while, and he looked about, when behold, fronting him were latticed windows in which stood cases planted with sweet-smelling herbs. [328] And hardly had he looked before those casements were opened and suddenly appeared thereat a young lady, [329] a model of comeliness and loveliness and fair figure and symmetrical grace, whose charms would amaze all who upon her gaze, and she began watering her plants. Ja'afar cast upon her a single glance and was sore hurt by her beauty and brilliancy; but she, after looking upon the lattices and watering the herbs to the extent they required turned her round and gazed down the street where she caught a sight of Ja'afar sitting and earnestly eyeing her. So she barred the windows and disappeared.

But the Minister lingered on the bench hoping and expecting that perhaps the casement would open a second time and allow him another look at her; and as often as he would have risen up his nature said to him, "Sit you down." And he stinted not so doing till evening came on, when he arose and returned to the house of Attaf, whom he found standing at the gateway to await him, and presently his host exclaimed, "'Tis well, O my lord! during all this delay indeed my thoughts have gone with you for that I have long been expecting your return." "'Tis such a while since I walked abroad," answered Ja'afar, "that I had needs look about me and console my soul, wherefor I lingered and loitered." Then they entered the house and sat down, when the eunuchs served up on trays the evening meal, and the Minister drew near to eat thereof but was wholly unable, so he cast from his hand the spoon and arose. Hereat said his host, "Why, O my lord, canst you not eat?" "Because this day's noon-meal has been heavy to me and hindereth my supping; but 'tis no matter!" said the other. And when the hour for sleep came Ja'afar retired to rest; but in his excitement by the beauty of that young lady he could not close eye, for her charms had mastered the greater part of his sense and had snared his senses as much as might be; nor could he do anything save groan and cry, "Ah miserable me! who shall enjoy your presence, O full Moon of the Age and who shall look upon that comeliness and loveliness?" And he ceased not being feverish and to twist and turn upon his couch until late morning, and he was as one lost with love; but as soon as it was the undurn-hour Attaf came in to him and said, "How is your health? My thoughts have been settled on you: and I see that your slumber has lasted until between dawn and midday: indeed I deem that you have lain awake o' night and have not slept until so near the midforenoon." "O my brother, I have no Kayf," [330] replied Ja'afar.

So the host forthwith sent a white slave to summon a physician, and the man did his bidding, and after a short delay brought one who was the preventer [331] of his day. And when ushered into Ja'afar's room he addressed the sick man, "There is no harm to you and boon of health befall you; [332] tell me what ails you?" "All is excitement [333] with me," answered the other, whereat the Leach putting forth his fingers felt the wrist of his patient, when he found the pulsations pulsing strong and the intermissions intermitting regularly. [334] Noting this he was ashamed to declare before his face, "You are in love!" so he kept silence and presently said to Attaf, "I will write you a recipe containing all that is required by the case." "Write!" said the host, and the Physician sat down to indite his prescription, when behold, a white slave came in and said to his lord, "Your Harim requires you." So the host arose and retired to learn what was requireth of him in the women's apartments, and when his wife saw him she asked, "O my lord, what is your pleasure that we cook for dinner and supper?" "Whatsoever may be wanted," he rejoined and went his ways, for since Ja'afar had been guested in his house Attaf had not once entered the inner rooms according as he had before declared to the Minister.

Now the Physician during the host's visit to the Harem had written out the prescription and had placed it under the pillow of the patient, and as he was leaving the house he came suddenly upon the housemaster on return to the men's apartment, and Attaf asked him, "Have you written your perscription?" "Yes," answered the Leach, "I have written it and set it under his head." Thereupon the host pulled out a piastre [335] and with it fee'd the physician; after which he went up to Ja'afar's couch and drew the paper from under his pillow and read it and saw therein written, [336] "O Attaf, verily your guest is a lover, so do you look for her he loves and for his state purvey and make not overmuch delay." So the host addressed his guest, saying, "You are now become one of us: why then hide from me your case and conceal from me your condition? This Doctor, than whom is none keener or cleverer in Damascus, has learned all that befell you." Hereupon he produced the paper and showed it to Ja'afar, who took it and read it with a smile; then he cried, "This Physician is a master leach and his saying is soothfast. Know that on the day when I went forth from you and sauntered about the streets and lanes, there befell me a matter which I never had thought to have betided me; no, never; and I know not what shall become of me for that, O my brother, Attaf, my case is one involving life-loss."

And he told him all that had happened to himself; how when seated upon the bench a lattice had been unclosed afront of him and he had seen a young lady, the loveliest of her time, who had thrown it open and had come forward to water her window-garden; adding, "Now my heart was upstirred by love to her, and she had suddenly withdrawn after looking down the street and closed the casement as soon as she had seen a stranger gazing upon her. Again and again I was minded to rise and retire, but desire for her kept me seated in the hope that perhaps she would again throw open the lattice and allow me the favour of another glimpse, so could I see her a second time. However, inasmuch as she did not show till evening came on I arose and repaired hither, but of my exceeding agitation for the ardour of love to her I was powerless to touch meat or drink, and my sleep was broken by the excess of desire for her which had homed in my heart. And now, O my brother Attaf, I have made known to you whatever betided me." When the host heard these words, he was certified that the house whereof Ja'afar spoke was his house and the lattice his own lattice and the lovely and lovesome young lady his wife the daughter of his paternal uncle, so he said in his thought, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great. Verily we were Allah's and unto Him shall we return!"

But presently he regained himself in the nobility of his nature, and he continued, "O Ja'afar, your intent is pure for that the dame you saw yesterday was divorced by her husband; and I will straightway fare to her father and bespeak him to the end that none may lay hand upon her; and then will I return and let you know all concerning her." So saying he arose and went at once to his cousin-wife [337] who greeted him and kissing his hand said to him, "Is your guest a-going?" Said he, "By no means; the cause of my coming to you is not his going, the reason thereof is my design of sending you to the home of your people, for that your father has met me in the market-street and declared to me that your mother is dying of a colick, and said to me, 'Go send her daughter without delay so that she may see her parent alive and meet her once more.'" Accordingly the young wife arose; and, hardly knowing how she moved for tears at such tidings, she took her slave-girls with her and repairing to her home rapped at the door, and her mother who opened to her cried on seeing her, "May this your coming (Inshallah!) be well, O my daughter, but how is it you come thus unexpected?" "Inshallah!" said the wife, "you are at rest from the colick?" and the mother rejoined, "Who told you I was colicky? but pass you within." So she entered the court and her father, named Abdullah Chelebi, [338] hearing her footstep from an inner room, asked, "What is there to do?" "You met," replied his daughter, "Attaf your son-in-law in the Bazar and did tell him that my mother was sore afflicted with a colick." Hearing this he exclaimed, "This day I went not once to the market-street nor have I seen a soul!"

Now they had not ceased conversing before the door was rapped; and as the slave girls opened it, they saw porters laden with the young lady's gear and garments and they led the men into the court where the father asked them, "Who sent these stuffs?" "Attaf," they replied, and setting down their loads within went their way. Then the father turned to his daughter and said to her, "What deed have done that my son-in-law bade take up your gear and have it sent after you?" And the mother said to him, "Hold your peace and speak not such speech lest the honor of the house be blamed and shamed." And as they were talking, behold, up came Attaf companied by a party of friends when his father-in-law asked him, "Wherefore have you done on this wise?" "To-day," answered he, "there came from me a wrongous oath: on account of my inclination to your daughter my heart is dark as night whereas her good name is whiter than my turband and ever bright. [339] Furthermore an occasion befell and this oath fell from my mouth and I bade her be the owner of herself. [340] And now will I beweep the past and straightway set her free."

So saying he wrote a writ of repudiation and returning to Ja'afar said, "From early dawn I have wearied myself [341] for your sake and have so acted that no man can lay hand upon her. And at last you may now enjoy life and go to the gardens and the Hammams and take your pleasure until the days of her widowhood [342] be gone by." Replied Ja'afar, "Allah quicken you for what you wrought of kindness to me," and Attaf rejoined, "Find for yourself something you require, O my brother." [343] Then he fell to taking him every day among the crowd of pleasure-seekers and solacing him with a show of joyous spectacles [344] till the term of divorce had sped, when he said to the Wazir, "O Ja'afar, I would counsel you with an especial counsel." "And what may it be, O my brother?" said the other; and said he, "Know, O my lord, that many of the folk have found the likeness between your Honour and Ja'afar the Barmecide, wherefore must I fain act on this wise. I will bring you a troop of ten Mamelukes and four servants on horseback, with whom do you fare privily and by night forth the city and presently transmit to me tidings from outside the walls that you the Grand Wazir, Ja'afar the Barmecide, are recalled to court and bound there from Egypt upon business ordered by the Sultan. Hereat the Governor of Damascus, 'Abd al-Malik bin Marván [345] and the Grandees of Syria will flock forth to meet and greet you with fêtes and feasts, after which do you send for the young lady's sire and of him ask her to wife. Then I will summon the Kazi and witnesses and will write out without stay or delay the marriage-writ with a dower of a thousand dinars the while you make ready for wayfare, and if you journey to Homs or to Hamah do you alight at whatever place pleases you. Also I will provide you of spending-money as much as your soul can desire and supply to you raiment and gear, horses and bat-animals, tents and pavilions of the cheap and of the dear, all you can require. So what say you concerning this counsel?" "Fair fall it for the best suggestion which has no peer," replied Ja'afar.

Hereupon Attaf arose and gathering his men about his guest sent him forth the city when the Minister wrote a write and dispatched it by twenty horsemen with a trader to inform the Governor of Syria that Ja'afar the Barmecide was passing that way and was about to visit Damascus on the special service of the Sultan. So the Kapújí [346] entered Damascus and read out the Wazirial letter [347] announcing Ja'afar's return from Egypt. Hereat the Governor arose and after sending a present of provisions [348] without the walls bade pitch the tents, and the Grandees of Syria rode forth to meet the Minister, and the Headmen of the Province set out to greet him, and he entered with all honor and consideration. It was indeed a day fit to be numbered among the days of a man's life, a day of general joyance for those present, and they read the Farmán and they offered the food and the forage to the Chamberlain and thus it became known to one and all of the folk that a writ of pardon had come to Ja'afar's hands and on this wise the noise went abroad, far and near, and the Grandees brought him all manner of presents.

After this Ja'afar sent to summon the young lady's father and as soon as he appeared in his presence, said to him, "Your daughter has been divorced?" and said the other, "Yes; she is at home with me." Said the Minister, "I would fain take her to wife;" and said the father, "Here am I ready to send her as your handmaid." The Governor of Sham added, "I will assume charge of the dowry," and the damsel's father rejoined, "It has already come to hand." [349] Hereat they summoned the Kazi and wrote out the writ of Ja'afar's marriage; and, having ended the ceremony, they distributed meat and drink to the poor in honor of the wedding, and Abd al-Malik bin Marwan said to Ja'afar, "Deign, O my lord, come hither with me and become my guest, and I will set apart for you a place in which you can consummate your marriage." But the other replied, "Nay, I may not do so; I am sent on public affairs by the Commander of the Faithful and I purpose setting off with my bride and marching without further delay."

The Grandees of Syria spent that night until morning without any being able to snatch a moment of sleep, and as soon as dawned the day Ja'afar sent to summon his father-in-law and said, "On the morrow I design setting forth, and I desire that my bride be ready for the road;" whereto replied the other, "Upon my head be it and my eyes!" Then Abdullah Chelebi fared homewards and said to his daughter, "O my child, Attaf has divorced you from bed and from board, whereas Sultan Ja'afar the Bermaki has taken you to wife, and on Allah is the repairing of our broken fortunes and the fortifying of our hearts." And she held her peace for displeasure by cause that she loved Attaf on account of the blood-tie and his exceeding great generosity. But on the next day Ja'afar sent a message to her sire informing him that the march would begin about mid-afternoon and that he wished him to make all ready, so the father did accordingly; and when Attaf heard thereof he sent supplies and spending-money. [350] At the time appointed the Minister took horse escorted by the Governor and the Grandees, and they brought out the mule-litter [351] in which was the bride, and the procession rode onwards until they had reached the Dome of the Birds, [352] whereat the Minister bade them return home and they obeyed him and farewelled him.

But on the ride back they all met Attaf coming from the city, and he reined in his horse and saluted the Governor and exchanged salams with his companions, who said to him, "Now at the very time we are going in you come out." Attaf made answer, "I knew not that he would set forth this day, but as soon as I was certified that he had mounted I sent to summon his escort and came forth a-following him." [353] To this the Governor replied, "Go catch them up at the Dome of the Birds, where they are now halting." Attaf followed this counsel and reaching the place alighted from his mare, and approaching Ja'afar embraced him and cried, "Laud to the Lord, O brother mine, who returns you to your home with fortunes repaired and heart fortified;" and said the Minister, "O Attaf, Allah place it in my power to requite you; but cease you not to write me and apprise me of your tidings; and for the nonce I order you to return hence and not to lie the night save in your own house." And his host did his bidding while the cousin-wife hearing his voice thrust her head out of the litter and looked upon him with flowing tears, understanding the length to which his generosity had carried him.

So fared it with Attaf and his affair; but now give ear to what befell him from Abd al-Malik bin Marwan. As they hied them home one who hated the generous man asked the Governor, "Do you know why he went forth to farewell his quondam guest at so late a time as this?" "Why so?" answered the other; and the detractor continued, "Ja'afar has tarried four months as a guest in his household, and disguised so that none save the host knew him, and now Attaf fared not forth for his sake but because of the woman." "What woman?" enquired the Governor, and the other replied, "His former wife, whom he divorced for the sake of this stranger, and married her to him; so this day he follows to enjoin him once more concerning the Government of Syria which perchance is promised to him. And 'tis better that you breakfast upon him before he sup upon you." The other enquired, "And whose daughter is she, is not her sire Abdullah Chelebi?" [354] Whereto the man answered, "Yes, O my lord, and I repeat that she was put away to the intent that Ja'afar might espouse her."

When the Governor heard these words, he was angry with wrath galore than which nothing could be more, and he hid his anger from Attaf for a while of time until he had devised a device to compass his destruction. At last, one day of the days, he bade cast the corpse of a murdered man into his enemy's garden and after the body was found by spies he had sent to discover the slayer, he summoned Attaf and asked him, "Who murdered yon man within your grounds?" Replied the other, "'Twas I slew him." "And why did slay him?" cried the Governor, "and what harm has he wrought you?" But the generous one replied, "O my lord, I have confessed to the slaughter of this man in order that I and only I may be mulcted in his blood-wite lest the neighbours say, 'By reason of Attaf's garden we have been condemned to pay his fine.'" Said Abd al-Malik, "Why should I want to take mulcts from the folk? Nay; I would command according to the Holy Law and even as Allah has ordered, 'A life for a life.'" He then turned for testimony to those present and asked them, "What said this man?" and they answered, "He said, 'I slew him.'" "Is the accused in his right mind or Jinn-mad?" [355] pursued the Governor; and they said, "In his senses." Then said the Governor to the Mufti, "O Efendi, deliver me your official decision according to that you heard from the accused's mouth;" and the Judge pronounced and indited his sentence upon the criminal according to his confession.

Hereupon the Governor gave order for his slaves to plunder the house and bastinado the owner; then he called for the headsman, but the Notables interfered and cried, "Give him a delay, for you have no right to slay him without further evidence; and better send him to gaol." Now all Damascus was agitated and excited by this affair, which came upon the folk so suddenly and unforeseen. And Attaf's friends [356] and familiars came down upon the Governor and went about spreading abroad that the generous man had not spoken such words save in fear lest his neighbours be molested and be mulcted for a murder which they never committed, and that he was wholly innocent of such crime. So Abd al-Malik bin Marwan summoned them and said, "If you plead that the accused is Jinn-mad this were folly, for he is the prince of intelligent men: I was resolved to let him life until the morrow; but I have been thwarted and this very night I will send and have him strangled." Hereupon he returned to prison and ordered the gaoler to do him die before day might break. But the man waxed angry with exceeding wrath to hear the doom devised for Attaf and having visited him in prison said to him, "Verily the Governor is determined to slay you for he was not satisfied with the intercession made for you by the folk or even with taking the legal blood-wite."

Hereat Attaf wept and cried, "Allah (be He magnified and glorified!) has assigned unto every death a cause. I desired but to do good among the garden folk and prevent their being fined; and now this benevolence has become the reason of my ruin." Then, after much 'say and said,' the gaoler spoke as follows, "Why talk after such fashion? I am resolved to set you free and to ransom you with my life; and at this very moment I will strike off your chains and deliver you from him. But do you arise and tear my face and pluck out my beard and rend my raiment; then, after thrusting a gag [357] into my mouth wend your ways and save your life and leave me to bear all blame." [358] Said Attaf, "Allah requite you for me with every weal!" Accordingly the gaoler did as he had undertaken and his prisoner went forth unhurt and at once followed the road to Baghdad.

So far concerning him; but now hear you what befell the Governor of Syria, Abd al-Malik bin Marwan. He took patience till midnight, when he arose and fared accompanied by the headsman to the gaol that he might witness the strangling of Attaf; but lo and behold! he found the prison door wide open and the keeper in sore sorrow with his raiment all rent to rags and his beard plucked out and his face scratched and the blood trickling from his four sides and his case was the miserablest of cases. So they removed the gag from his mouth and the Governor asked him, "Who did with you on this wise?" and the man answered, "O my lord, yesternight, about the middle thereof, a gang of vagabonds and ne'er-do-wells as they were 'Ifrits of our lord Sulayman (upon whom be The Peace!), not one of whom I recognized, came upon me and before I was aware of them they broke down the prison door and killed me; [359] and when I would have cried aloud and shouted for aid they placed yonder gag in my mouth, then they wounded me and shredded my dress and left me in the state you see. Moreover they took Attaf after breaking his chains and said to him, 'Go and lay your complaint before the Sultan.'"

Now those who accompanied the Governor said, "This is a gaoler and the son of a gaoler, nor during all his days has anyone charged him with letting a prisoner out of hand." Said Abd al-Malik to the wounded man, "Go to your house and stay there;" whereat he straightway arose and went his ways. After this the Governor took horse, he and his escort; and all rode off to search for Attaf during a term of four days and some of them dug and dug deep down while the others returned after a bootless errand, and reported that they had failed to find him.

Such was the case with the Governor of Syria; and now give ear to the adventure of Attaf. He left not wayfaring until but a single stage remained between him and Baghdad when robbers came upon him and stripped him of all his clothes, so that he was compelled to enter the capital in foulest condition, naked even as his mother bare him. And after some charitable fellow had thrown an old robe about him and bound his head with a clout (and his unshorn hair fell over his eyes) [360] he fell to asking for the mansion of the Wazir Ja'afar and the folk guided him thereto. But when he would have entered the attendants suffered him not; so he stood at the gate till an old man joined him. Attaf enquired of him saying, "Have you with you, O Shaykh, an ink-case and pens and paper?" and the other replied, "I have; but what is your need thereof? tell me, so may I write for you." "I will write myself," rejoined Attaf; and when the old man handed to him the gear, he took seat and indeed an address to Ja'afar informing him of all that passed from first to last, and especially of his own foul plight. [361] Presently he returned the ink-case and reed pens to the Shaykh; and, going up to the gate, asked those standing about the doors, "Will you not admit for me this missive and place it in the hand of his Highness, Ja'afar the Bermaki, the Wazir?" "Give it here," said they, and one of them took it with the intent of handing it to the Minister when suddenly the cannon roared; [362] the palace was in a hubbub and each and everyone cried, "What is to do?" Hereat many voices replied, "The Sultan, who has been favored with a man-child, who had charged himself with the letter, threw it in that confusion from his hand and Attaf was led to gaol as a vagrant.

Then Ja'afar took horse and, after letting read the Sultan's rescript about the city-decorations, gave command that all the prisoners be released, Attaf among the number. As he issued forth the gaol he beheld all the streets adorned with flags and tapestry, and when evening approached eating-cloths and trays of food were set and all fell-in, while sundry said to Attaf who was in pauper plight, "Come and eat thou;" for it was a popular feast. [363] And affairs went on after this same fashion and the bands made music and cannon was fired until ended the week of decoration during which the folk ceased not to-ing and fro-ing. As evening evened Attaf entered a cathedral-mosque and prayed the night-prayers when he was accosted by the eunchs who cried, "Arise and depart, that we may close the mosque-door, O Attaf," for his name had become known. He replied, "O man, the Apostle of Allah saith, 'Whoever strives for good is as the doer thereof and the doer is of the people of Paradise:' so suffer me to sleep here in some corner;" but said the other, "Up with you and be off: yesterday they stole me a bit of matting and tonight I will bolt the door nor allow any to sleep here. And indeed the Apostle of Allah (whom the Almighty save and assain!) has forbidden sleep o' nights in the mosques." Attaf had no competence to persuade the Castrato by placing himself under his protection, albeit he prayed him sore saying, "I am a stranger in the city nor have I knowledge of any, so do you permit me here to pass this one night and no more." But as he was again refused he went forth into the thoroughfares where the street dogs barked at him, and thence he trudged on to the market where the watchmen and warders cried out at him, till at last he entered a ruinous house where he stumbled when walking and fell over something which proved to be a youth lately murthered, and in tripping he fell upon his face and his garments were bewrayed and crimsoned with blood. And as he stood in doubt as to what must be done the Wali and the watch, who were going round the town by night, met him face to face; and as soon as they saw him all rushed at him in a body and seizing him bore him to the gaol.

Here we leave speaking of him; and now return we to Ja'afar and what befell him. After he had set out from Damascus and sent back Attaf from the Dome of the Birds he said in his mind, "Thou art about to consummate marriage with a damsel and to travel until you shall reach Baghdad, so meanwhile up and take you an ewer of water and make the Wuzú and pray." However, as he purposed that evening to go in unto the wife of Attaf, controversy forewent compliments [364] and the tent-pitchers, who were sent on to the next station to set up the pavilion of the bride and the other tents. Ja'afar took patience until every eye however wakeful waxed sleep-full, at which time he rose up and went in to Attaf's wife who, the moment she saw him enter, covered her face with her hands as from a stranger. "The Peace be upon you!" said he and said she, "With you also be The Peace and the pity of Allah and His blessings." Then he continued, "O daughter of my father's brother [365] why have you placed your hand upon your face? in the lawful there be nothing of shameful." "True, O my lord," she replied, "but Modesty is a part of Religion. If to one the like of you it be a light matter that the man who guested you and served you with his coin and his case be treated on this wise and you have the heart to take his mate from him, then am I but a slave between your hands." "Art you the divorced wife of Attaf?" asked Ja'afar, and she answered, "I am." Said he, "And why did your husband on such wise?" and said she, "The while I stood watering plants at the window, your Highness deigned look upon me and you toldest your love to Attaf, who immediately put me away and made me wife to your Worship. And this is wherefore I conceal from you my face." Ja'afar cried, "Thou art now unlawful to him and licit to me; but presently you shall become illicit to me and legitimate to your husband; so from this time forth you art dearer and more honorable to me than my eyes and my mother and my sister. But for the moment your return to Damascus is not possible for fear of foolish tongues lest they prattle and say, 'Attaf went forth to farewell Ja'afar, and his wife lay the night with the former, and thus have the back-bones had a single lappet.' [366] However I will bear you to Baghdad where I will stablish you in a spacious and well furnished lodging with ten slave girls and eunuchs to serve you; and, as long as you abide with me, I will give you [367] every day five golden ducats and every month a suit of sumptuous clothes. Moreover everything in your lodging shall be thine; and whatever gifts and offerings be made to you they shall be your property, for the folk will fancy you to be my bride and will entertain you and escort you to the Hammams and present you with sumptuous dresses. After this fashion you shall pass your days in joyance and you shall abide with me in highmost honor and esteem and worship till what time we see that can be done. So from this moment forth [368] throw away all fear and hereafter be happy in heart and high in spirits, for that now you standest me in stead of mother and sister and here nothing shall befall you save weal. And now my first desire to you which burned in my soul has been quenched and exchanged for brotherly love yet stronger than what forewent it."

So Attaf's wife rejoiced with exceeding joy; and, as they pursued their journey, Ja'afar ceased not to clothe her in the finest of clothes, so that men might honor her as the Wazir's Consort; and ever to entreat her with yet increasing deference. This endured until they entered Baghdad-city where the attendants bore her Takhtrawan into the Minister's Harem and an apartment was set apart for her even as he had promised, and she was provided with a monthly allowance of a thousand dianrs and all the comforts and conveniences and pleasures whereof he had bespoken her; nor did he ever allow his olden flame for her to flare up again, and he never went near her, but sent messengers to promise her a speedy reunion with her mate. Such was the case of Ja'afar and Attaf's wife; and now give ear to what befelll and betided the Minister during his first reception by his liege lord who had sorely regretted his departure and was desolated by the loss of him. As soon as he presented himself before the Caliph, who rejoiced with exceeding joy and returned his salute and his deprecation of evil, [369] the Commander of the Faithful asked him, "Where was the bourne of this your wayfare?" and he answered, "Damascus." "And where did alight?" "In the house of one Attaf hight," rejoined Ja'afar, who recounted all that his host had done with him from the beginning to the end. The Prince of True Believers took patience, until he had told his story and then cried to his Treasurer saying, "Hie you hence and open the Treasury and bring me forth a certain book." And when this was done he continued, "Hand that volume to Ja'afar."

Now when the Minister took it and read it he found written therein all that had occurred between Attaf and himself and he left not reading till he came to the time when the twain, host and guest, had parted and each had farewel'ed other and Attaf had fared homewards. Hereupon the Caliph cried to him, "Close the book at what place it completeth the recital of your bidding adieu to Attaf and of his returning to his own place, so shall you understand how it was I said to you, 'Near me not until you bring that which is contained in this volume.'" Then the Commander of the Faithful restored the book to the Treasurer saying, "Take this and set it in the bibliotheca;" then, turning to Ja'afar he observed, "Verily Almighty Allah (be He glorified and magnified!) has deigned show you whatever I read therein until I fell a-weeping and a-laughing at one and the same time. So now do you retire and hie you home." Ja'afar did his bidding and reassumed the office of Wazir after fairer fashion than he was before. And now return we to the purport of our story as regardeth the designs of Attaf and what befell him when they took him out of gaol. They at once led him to the Kazi who began by questioning him, saying, "Woe to you, did you murther this Háshimi?" [370] Replied he, "Yes, I did!" "And why killedst you him?" "I found him in yonder ruin, and I struck him advisedly and slew him!" "Art you in your right senses?" "Yea, verily." "What may be your name?" "I am hight Attaf." Now when the Judge heard this confession, which was thrice repeated, he wrote a writ to the Mufti and acquainted him with the contention; and the divine after delivering his decision produced a book and therein indited the procès-verbal.

Then he sent notice thereof to Ja'afar the Wair for official order to carry out the sentence and the Minister took the document and affixing his seal and signature thereto gave the order for the execution. So they bore Attaf away and led him to the gallows-foot where he was followed by a world of folk in number as the dust; and, as they set him under the tree Ja'afar the Wazir, who was riding by with his suite at the time, suddenly espied a crowd going forth the city. Thereupon he summoned the Sobáshí [371] who came up to him and kissed his knee. "What is the object of this gathering of folk who be manifold as the dust and what do they want?" said the Wazir; and said the officer, "We are wending to hang [372] a Syrian who has murthered a youth of Sharif family." "And who may be this Syrian?" asked the Wazir, and the other answered, "One hight Attaf." But when Ja'afar heard the word Attaf he cried out with a mighty loud outcry and said, "Hither with him." So after loosing the noose from his neck they set him before the Wazir who regarding him at once recognized his whilome host albeit he was in the meanest of conditions, so he sprang up and threw himself upon him and he in turn threw himself upon his sometime quest. [373] "What condition be this?" said Ja'afar as soon as he could speak, and said Attaf, "This comes of my acquaintance with you which has brought me to such pass."

Hereupon the twain swooned clean away and fell down fainting on the floor, and when they came to themselves and could rise to their feet Ja'afar the Wazir sent his friend Attaf to the Hammam with a sumptuous suit of clothes which he donned as he came out. Then the attendants led him to the Wazirial mansion where both took seat and drank wine and ate the early meal [374] and after their coffee they sat together in converse. And when they had rested and were cheered, Ja'afar said, "Do you acquaint me with all that betided you from the time we took leave each of other until this day and date." So Attaf fell to telling him how he had been entreated by Abdal-Malik bin Marwan, Governor of Syria; how he had been thrown into prison and how his enemy came there by night with intent to strangle him; also how the gaoler devised a device to save him from slaughter and how he had fled nor ceased flight till he drew near Baghdad when robbers had stripped him; how he had lost an opportunity of seeing the Wazir because the city had been decorated; and, lastly, what had happened to him through being driven from the Cathedral-mosque; brief, he recounted all from commencement to conclusion.

Hereupon the Minister loaded him with benefits and presently gave orders to renew the marriage-ceremony between man and wife; and she seeing her husband led in to pay her the first visit lost her senses, and her wits flew from her head and she cried aloud, "Would Heaven I wot if this be on wake or the imbroglio of dreams!" So she started like one frightened and a moment after she threw herself upon her husband and cried, "Say me, do I view you in vision or really in the flesh?" whereto he replied, "In the world of sense and no sweven is this." Then he took seat beside her and related to her all that had befallen him of hardships and horrors till he was taken from under the Hairibee; and she on her part recounted how she had dwelt under Ja'afar's roof, eating well and drinking well and dressing well and in honor and worship the highmost that might be. And the joy of this couple on reunion was perfect.

But as for Ja'afar when the morning morrowed, he arose and fared for the Palace; then, entering the presence, he narrated to the Caliph all that had befallen Attaf, art and part; and the Commander of the Faithful rejoined, "Indeed this adventure is the most wondrous that can be, and the most marvelous that ever came to pass." Presently he called to the Treasurer and bade him bring the book a second time from the Treasury, and when it was brought the Prince of True Believers took it, and handing it to Ja'afar, said to him, "Open and read." So he perused the whole tale of Attaf with himself the while his liege lord again wept and laughed at the same moment and said, "In very deed, all things strange and rare are written and laid up among the treasuries of the Kings; and therefor I cried at you in my wrath and forbade you my presence until you couldst answer the question, What is there is this volume? and you couldst comprehend the cause of my tears and my smiles. Then you wentest from before me and wast driven by doom of Destiny until befell you with Attaf that which did befal; and in fine you returnedst with the reply I required." Then the Caliph enrobed Ja'afar with a sumptuous honor-robe and said to the attendants, "Bring hither to me Attaf."

So they went out and brought him before the Prince of True Believers; and the Syrian standing between his hands blessed the Sovran and prayed for his honor and glory in permanence of prosperity and felicity. Hereat said the Caliph, "O Attaf ask what you wishest!" and said the generous man, "O King of the Age, I pray only your pardon for Abd al-Malik bin Marwan." "For that he harmed htee?" asked Harun al-Rashid, and Attaf answered, "O my lord, the transgression came not from him, but from Him who caused him work my wrong; and I have freely pardoned him. Also do thou, O my lord, write a Farmán with your own hand certifying that I have sold to the gaoler, and have received from the price thereof, all my slaves and estates in fullest tale and most complete. Moreover deign you appoint him inspector over the Governor of Syria [375] and forward to him a signet-ring by way of sign that no petition which doth not bear that seal shall be accepted or even shall be heard and lastly transmit all this with a Chamberlain unto Damascus."

Now all the citizens of Syria were expecting some ill-turn from the part of Attaf, and with this grievous thought they were engrossed, when suddenly tidings from Baghdad were bruited abroad; to wit, that a Kapuji was coming on Attaf's business. Hereat the folk feared with exceeding great affright and fell to saying, "Gone is the head of Abd al-Malik bin Marwan, and gone all who could say anything in his defence." And when the arrival of the Chamberlain was announced all fared forth to meet and greet him, and he entered on a day of flocking and crowding, [376] which might be truly numbered among the days and lives of men. And presently he produced the writ of indemnity, and pardon may not be procured save by one duly empowered to pardon. Then he sent for the gaoler and committed to him the goods and chattels of Attaf, together with the signet and the appointment of supervisor over the Governor of Syria with an especial Farman that no order be valid unless sealed with the superior's seal. Nor was Abd al-Malik bin Marwan less rejoiced that the adventure had ended so well for him when he saw the Kapuji returning Baghdad-wards that he might report all concerning his mission. But as for Attaf, his friend Ja'afar bestowed upon him seigniories and presented him with property and moneys exceeding tenfold what he had whilome owned and made him more prosperous than he had ever been aforetime.


A Note on the Tale of Attaf


Mr. Alexander J. Cotheal, of New York, a correspondent who already on sundry occasions has rendered me able aid and advice, was kind enough to send me his copy of the Tale of Attaf (the "C. MS." of the foregoing pages). It is a small 4to of pp. 334, size 5 3/4 by 8 inches, with many of the leaves injured and repaired; and written in a variety of handwritings, here a mere scribble, there regular and legible as printed Arabic. A fly-leaf inserted into the Arabic binding contains in cursive hand the title, "A Book embracing many Tales of the Tales of the Kings and named 'Stories from the Thousand Nights and a Night'." And a note at the end supplies the date: "And the finish thereof was on Fifth Day (Thursday), 9th from the beginning of the auspicious month Rabí'a 2nd, in the year 1096 of the Hijrah of the Apostle, upon whom be the choicest of blessings and the fullest of greetings; and Allah prospereth what he pleaseth, [377] and praise be to God the One." Thus (A.H. 1096 = A.D. 1685) the volume is upwards of 200 years old. It was bought by Mr. Cotheal many years ago with other matters among the effects of a deceased American missionary who had brought it from Syria.

The "Tale of Attaf" occupies pp. 10-50, and the end is abrupt. The treatment of the "Novel" contrasts curiously with that of the Chavis MS. which forms my text, and whose directness and simplicity give it a European and even classical character. It is an excellent study of the liberties allowed to themselves by Eastern editors and scribes. In the Cotheal MS. the tone is distinctly literary, abounding in verse (sometimes repeated from other portions of The Nights), and in Saj'a or Cadence which the copyist sometimes denotes by marks in red ink. The wife of Attaf is a much sterner and more important personage than in my text: she throws water upon her admirer as he gazes upon her from the street, and when compelled to marry him by her father, she "gives him a bit of her mind" as forcibly and stingingly as if she were of "Anglo-Saxon" blood; e.g. "An you have in you anything of manliness and generosity you will divorce me even as he did." Sundry episodes like that of the brutal Eunuch at Ja'afar's door, and the Vagabond in the Mosque, are also introduced; but upon this point I need say no more, as Mr. Cotheal shall now speak for himself.

The Tale of Attaf.

Story of Attaf the generous, and what happened to him with the Wazir Ja'afar who fell in love with a young lady not knowing her to be the cousin-wife of Attaf who, in his generosity divorced her and married her to him. The Naïb of Damascus being jealous of Attaf's intimacy with Ja'afar imprisons him for treason and pillages his property. Escape of Attaf from prison and his flight to Baghdad where he arrives in a beggarly condition, and being accused of assassination is condemned to death, but being released he goes to Ja'afar who recognises him and is rewarded by him and the Caliph. His wife is restored to him and after a while they are sent home to Damascus of which he is appointed Wali in place of the Naïb who is condemned to death, but is afterwards exiled.

In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate, to whom we cry for help.

They say God is omniscient, knowing the past and the future, and we learn from the histories of the peoples that there was in ancient times and bygone seasons (and God knows best!) a Caliph of the Caliphs or the orthodox and he was Harun er-Rashid who one night became very restless and from the drowsiness that came upon him he sat down upon the bed and dressed himself in sleeping-clothes; then it was that he called to his service Mesrúr the sword-bearer of grace who came immediately into his presence and said to him, O Mesrur, the night is very oppressive and I wish you to dispel my uneasiness. Then Mesrur said to him, O Commander of the Faithful, arise now and go to the terrace-roof of the palace and look upon the canopy of heaven and upon the twinkling stars and the brightness of the moon, while listening to the music of the rippling streams and the creaking norias as they are spoken of by the poet who said:—

A Noria that discharges by the spouts of her tears resembles the actions of a distracted lover: She is the lover of her branches (sweeps or levers) by the magic in her heart until she laughs: She complains and the tears run from her eyes, she rises in the morning to find herself weeping and complaining.

Then he said, O Commander of the Faithful, the streams also are thus mentioned by one of them:—

My favorite is a damsel dispensing drink, and my recreation is a running stream; A damsel whose eyes are a garden of Paradise, and a garden whose springs make a running brook.

Then again said Harun er-Rashid, O Mesrur, such is not my wish, and Mesrur replied, O Commander of the Faithful, in your palace are three hundred and sixty damsels, they are your concubines and your slaves, and they are as if they were rising moons and beautiful gazelles, and in elegant robes they are dressed like the flowers. Walk around in the midst of the palaces and from your hiding-place see each of them enter by herself in her own apartment admiring her beauty and her magnificent dresses, all showing their joy and mirth since they will not know of you; then listen to their singing and their playing and their joyous company in their apartments and perhaps you'll attach yourself to one of them who'll play with you, keep you awake and be your cup-companion, dispelling what may remain of your restlessness. But he replied, O Mesrur, bring to me my cousin Ja'afar the Barmeky immediately. So he answered, Hearing is obedience. Then Mesrur went out to the house of Ja'afar and said to him, Come to the Commander of the Faithful, and he answered, To hear is to obey. Then Ja'afar dressed himself and went with Mesrur to the Caliph and kissing the ground before him he said, May it be good! O Commander of the Faithful. It is not other than good, he answered, but I am wearied this night with a great weariness and I sent for you to divert me so that my unrest may be dissipated. Then Ja'afar said, Let's get up, O Commander of the Faithful, and we'll go out into the garden of the palace and listen to the warbling of the birds and smell of the odours of the flowers, and the cool zephyr with its gentle breath will pass over us, dispelling our uneasiness and gladdening the heart. The Rawi says that Ja'afar was very familiar with the Caliph by reason of the endearment between them. Then the Caliph arose and with Ja'afar and Mesrur went to the garden. The Caliph began to be thoughtful and asked about the trees and the qualities of the flowers and the fruits and the nature of their colors, and as the Caliph took pleasure in that, he walked around for an hour and then passed over to the palaces and houses, going from place to place, from quarter to quarter, and from market to market; and, while they were going on, they stopped before a bookshop and the Caliph opened a book-case and began to turn over the books one by one, and taking one in his hand opened it, began to read in it, and then suddenly laughed until he fell upon his back. He read in it again and wept until his beard was wet with the falling tears, and wrapping up the book he put it in his sleeve when Ja'afar said, O Commander of the Faithful and Lord of the two worlds, what was it that made you laugh and then weep at the same time? When the Caliph heard that he was angered and cried out at him in the midst of his rage, O dog of a Barmeky, what an impertinence on your part about what concerns you not, why meddle with what you have not lost. You've taken upon yourself to be annoying and conceited, you have passed beyond your place and it only remained for you to brave the Caliph. By my fathers and grandfathers, if you dost not bring me someone who can tell me about the contents of this book from the first page to the last, I'll strike your neck and show you what it is that has made me laugh and cry. When Ja'afar heard these words and saw his passion he said, O Commander of the Faithful, I have committed a fault: a sin is for the like of me and forgiveness for the like of your Highness; to which the Caliph answered, I have made oath, you must bring that person to explain the book or I'll strike your neck this very hour. Then Ja'afar said, O Commander of the Faithful, God created the heavens and the two worlds in six days and if it had pleased Him He could have created them in a single hour, but He did so for an instruction to his worshippers that one should not fault with another but be patient; then, O Lord, be you patient with your servant if it be for three days only; and the Caliph replied to him, If you bringest not to me him whom I have mentioned I will slay you with the most horrible of deaths. At this Ja'afar said, I depart on your mission; thereupon Ja'afar went home with a sorrowful heart to his father Yahya and his brother El-Fadl to take leave of them and weep. Then they said to him, What is your trouble? so he told them of what had occurred between him and the Caliph and of the condition laid upon him of execution if not complied with in three days, for doubtless the Caliph seeks my death; he who strikes against a point, 'twill pierce his hand, and he that struggles with a lion will be killed; but as to myself I can no longer remain with him for that would be the greatest of dangers for me and for you, O my father, and for you, O my brother. I now set out to travel and I wish to go far away from his eye. The preservation of life is not esteemed and is of little value: distance is the best preservative for our necks-as is said by the poet:—

Save your life if menaced by evil (danger), and leave the house to complain of the builder: You'll find a land upon a land, but not another life for your own life.

When he had finished, his father and his brother said to him, Do not do so, for probably the Caliph will be merciful to you. And Ja'afar answered, Only good will come of my travel. Then he went to his treasure-room and took out a purse containing 1,000 dinars, mounted his horse, put on his sword, bade adieu to his father and brother and set forth in his time and hour; then, not taking with him any servants, either slave or boy, he hastened on his journey, travelling day and night for twenty days until he reached the city of Aleppo without stopping, passing by Hamah and Homs until he reached Teniyát al-Igáb and arrived at Damascus where he entered the city and saw the Minaret of the Bride from bottom to top covered with gilded tiles; and it surrounded with meadows, irrigated gardens with all kinds of flowers, fields of myrtle with mountains of violets and other beauties of the gardens. He dwelt upon these charms while listening to the singing of the birds in the trees; and he saw a city whose like has never been created in any other country of the world. Turning then to the right hand and to the left he espied a man standing near him and said to him, O my brother, what's the name of this city? and he answered, O my lord, this city in ancient times was called Jullag the same that is mentioned by the poet who says:—

I am called Jullag and my heart I attach, in me flow the waters, in and out; The Garden of Eden upon the earth, birth-place of the fairies: I will never forget your beauties, O Damascus, for none but you will I ever long:— Blessed be the wonders that glitter on your roofs (expanse).

She was also called Sham (grain of beauty) because she is the Sham of Cities and the Sham of God on earth. Ja'afar was pleased at the explanation of the name, and dismounted with the intention of taking a stroll through the streets, by the great houses and the domes (mosks). Whilst thus engaged in examining the various places and their beauties, he perceived a tent of silk brocade called Dibáj, containing carpets, furniture, cushions, silk curtains, chairs and beds. A young man was sitting upon a mattress, and he was like a rising moon, like the shining orb in its fourteenth night. He was in an undress, upon his head a kerchief and on his body a rose-colored gaberdine; and as he sat before him were a company and drinks worthy of Kings. Ja'afar stopped and began to contemplate the scene, and was pleased with what he saw of the youth; then looking further he espied a damsel like unto the sun in serene firmament who took her lute and played on it while singing:—

Evil to whoever have their heart in possession of their lovers, for in obtaining it they will kill it: They have abandoned it when they have seen it amorous: when they see it amorous they abandon it. Nursling, they pluck it out from the very entrails: O bird, repeat "Nursling they have plucked you out!" They have killed it unjustly: the loved plays the coquette with the humble lover. The seeker of the effects of love, love am I, brother of love, and sigh Behold the man stricken by love, though his heart change not they bury it (him?).

The Rawi said that Ja'afar was pleased and he rejoiced at hearing the song and all his organs were moved at the voice of the damsel and he said, Wallahy, it is fine. Then she began again to sing, reciting the following verses:—

With these sentiments you art in love, it is not wonderful that I should love you: I stretch out my hand to you asking for mercy and pity for my humility—mayst you be charitable; My life has passed away soliciting your consent, but I have not found it in my confidence to be charitable, And I have become a slave in consequence of her possession of love my heart is imprisoned and my tears flow.

When the poem was finished Ja'afar gave himself up more and more to the pleasure of hearing and looking at the damsel. The youth, who was reclining, sat up and calling some of his boys said to them, Don't you see that young man standing there in front of us? They answered, Yes, and he said, He must be a stranger for I see on him the signs of travel; bring him to me and take care not to offend him. They answered, With joy and gladness, and went towards Ja'afar, who, while contemplating the damsel, perceived the boy that came and who said to him, In the name of God, O my lord, please have the generosity to come in to our master. Ja'afar came with the boy to the door of the tent, dismounted from his horse and entered at hte moment when the youth was rising upon his feet, and he stretched out his two hands and saluted him as if he had always known him, and after he had chanted the prayer to the envoy (of Allah) he sang:—

O my visitor be welcome, you enlivenest us and bringest us our union: By your face I live when it appears and I die if it disappears.

Then he said to Ja'afar, Please be seated, my dear sir; thanks be to God for your happy arrival; and he continued his chant after another prayer to the envoy (of God):—

If we had known of your arrival we would have covered (thy) heart with the black of our eyes, And we would have spread the street with out cheeks that your coming might have been between our eyelids.

After that he arose, kissed the breast of Ja'afar, magnified his power and said to him, O my Master, this day is a happy one and were it not a fast-day I would have fasted for you to render thanks to God. Then came up the servants to whom he said, Bring us what is ready. They spread the table of viands and the youth said, O my lord, the Sages say, If you are invited content yourself with what's before you, but if you are not invited, stay not and visit not again; if we had known that you would arrive to-day we would have sacrified the flesh of our bodies and our children. Ja'afar said, I put out my hand and I ate until I was satisfied, while he was presenting me with his hand the delicate morsels and taking pleasure in entertaining me. When we had finished they brought the ewer and basin, we washed our hands and we passed into the drinking room where he told the damsel to sing. She took up her lute, tuned it, and holding it against her breast she began:—

A visitor of whom the sight is venerated by all, sweeter than either spirit or hope: He spreads the darkness of his hair over the morning dawn and the dawn of shame appeared not; And when my lot would kill me I asked his protection, his arrival revived a soul that death reclaimed: I've become the slave of the Prince of the Lovers and the dominion of love was of my making.

The Rawi says that Ja'afar was moved with exceeding joy, as was also the youth, but he did not fail to be fearful on account of his affair with the Caliph, so that it showed itself in his countenance, and this anxiety was apparent to the youth who knew that he was anxious, frightened, dreaming and uncertain. Ja'afar perceived that the youth was ashamed to question him on his position and the cause of his condition, but the youth said to him, O my lord, listen to what the Sages have said:—

Worry not yourself for things that are to come, drive away your cares by the intoxicating bowl: See you not that hands have painted beautiful flowers on the robes of drink? Spoils of the vine-branch, lilies and narcissus, and the violet and the striped flower of N'uman: If troubles overtake you, lull them to sleep with liquors and flowers and favourites.

Then said he to Ja'afar, Contract not your breast, and to the damsel, Sing; and she sang, and Ja'afar who was delighted with her songs, said Let us not cease our enjoyment, now in conversation, now in song until the day closes and night comes with darkness.

The youth ordered the servants to bring up the horses and they presented to his guest a mare fit for Kings. We mounted (said Ja'afar), and, entering Damascus, I proceeded to look at the bazars and the streets until we came to a large square in the middle of which were two mastabas or stone benches before a high doorway brilliantly illuminated with divers lights, and before a portière was suspended a lamp by a golden chain. There were lofty domes surrounded by beautiful statues, and containing various kinds of birds and abundance of flowing water, and in their midst was a hall with windows of silver. He opened it and found it looking upon a garden like that of Paradise animated by the songs of the birds and the perfumes of the flowers and the ripple of the brooks. The house, in which were fountains and birds warbling their songs understood in every language, was carpeted with silken rugs and furnished with cushions of Dibaj-brocade. It contained also in great number costly articles of every kind, it was perfumed with the odours of flowers and fruits and it contained every other imaginable thing, plates and dishes of silver and gold, drinking vessels, and a censer for ambergris, powder of aloes and every sort of dried fruits. Brief, it was a house like that described by the poet:—

Society became perfectly brilliant in its beauty and shone in the eclat of its magnificience.

Ja'afar said, When I sat down the youth came to me and asked, From what country art thou? I replied, From Basora, soldier by profession, commandant over a company of men and I used to pay a quit-rent to the Caliph. I became afraid of him for my life and I came away fleeing with downcast face for dread of him, and I never ceased wandering about the country and in the deserts until Destiny has brought me to you. The youth said, A blessed arrival, and what may be your name? I replied, My name is like your own. On hearing my words he smiled, and said, laughing, O my lord, Abu 'l-Hasan, carry no trouble in your heart nor contraction of your breast; then he ordered a service and they set for us a table with all kinds of delicacies and we ate until satisfied. After this they took away the table and brought again the ewer and basin and we washed our hands and then went to the drinking room where there was a pleasaunce filled with fruits and flowers in perfection. Then he spoke to the damsel for music and she sang, enchanting both Ja'afar and the youth with delight at her performances, and the place itself was agitated, and Ja'afar in the excess of his joy took off his robes and tore them. Then the youth said to him, Wallahy, may the tearing be the effect of the pleasure and not of sorrow and waywardness, and may God disperse far from you the bitterness of your enemies. Then he went to a chest (continued Ja'afar) and took out from it a complete dress, worth a hundred dinars and putting it upon me said to the damsel, Change the tune of your lute. She did so, and sang the following verses:—

My jealous regard is attached to him and if he regard another I am impatient: I terminate my demand and my song, crying, your friendship will last until death in my heart.

The Rawi said: When she had finished her poetry Ja'afar threw off the last dress and cried out, and the youth said, May God ameliorate your life and make its beginning the end. Then he went to the chest and took out a dress better than the first and put it upon Ja'afar and the damsel was silent for an hour during the conversation. The youth said, Listen, O my lord Abu 'l-Hasan, to what people of merit have said of this valley formerly called the Valley of Rabwat in which we now are and spoken of in the poem, saying:—

O bounty of our Night in the valley of Rabwat where the gentle zephyr brings in her perfumes: It is a valley whose beauty is like that of the necklace: trees and flowers encompass it. Its fields are carpeted with every variety of flowers and the birds fly around above them; When the trees saw us seated beneath them they dropped upon us their fruits. We continued to exchange upon the borders of its gardens the flowing bowls of conversation and of poesy, The valley was bountiful and her zephyrs brought to us what the flowers had sent to us.

So when the youth had finished his recitation he turned to the damsel and told her to sing:—

I consume (with desire) when I hear from him a discourse whose sweetness is a melting speech: My heart palpitates when he sees it, it is not wonderful that the drunken one should dance: It has on this earth become my portion, but on this earth I have no chance to obtain it. O Lord! tell me the fault that I've committed, perhaps I may be able to correct it. I find in you a heart harder than that of others and the hearts consume my being.

Now when she had finished, Ja'afar in his joy threw off the third dress. The youth arose, kissed him on the head, and then took out for him another suit and put it upon him, for he was the most generous man of his time. Then he enteretained Ja'afar with the news of the day and of the subjects and anecdotes of the great pieces of poetry and said to him, O my lord, load not yourself with cares. The Rawi says that they continued living in the same way for forty days and on the forty-first Ja'afar said to the young man, Know, O my lord, that I have left my country neither for eating nor for drinking, but to divert myself and to see the world; but if God vouchsafe my return to my country to talk to my people, my neighbours and frieds, and they ask me where I have been and what I have seen, I will tell them of your generosity and of the great benefactions that you have heaped upon me in your country of Damascus. I will say that I have sighted this and that, and thus I will entertain them with what I have espied in Damascus and of its order. The young man replied, you sayest true: and Ja'afar said, I desire to go out and visit the city, its bazars and its streets, to which the young man answered, With love and good will, to-morrow morning if it please Allah. That night Ja'afar slept there and when God brought the day, he rose, went in to the young man, wished him good morning and said to him, O my lord, your promise! to which he replied, With love and good will; and, ordering a white dress for him, he handed him a purse of three hundred dinars saying, Bestow this in charity and return quick after you have made your visit, and lastly said to his servants, Bring to your lord a horse to ride. But Ja'afar answered, I do not wish to have one, for a rider cannot observe the people but the people observe him. The young man, who was named Attaf, said, O my lord, be it as you wishest and desirest; be not away long on my account for your absence gives me pain. Then he gave to Ja'afar a grain of red musk saying, Take this and keep it in your hand and if you go into any place where there is a bad odour you will take a smell of the musk. Ja'afar the Barmeky (Allah be merciful to him!) said, After that I left him and set out to walk in the streets and quarters of Damascus and went on until I came to the Most of the 'Omeyyades where I saw a fountain casting the water from its upper part and falling like serpents in their flight. I sat down under the pulpit; and as it was a Friday I heard the preacher and made my Friday prayer and remained until I made the afternoon prayer when I went to distribute the money I had, after which I recited these verses:—

I see the beauties united in the mosk of Jullag, and around her the meaning of beauty is explained; If people converse in the mosks tell them their entrance door is open.

Then I left the mosk and began to promenade the quarters and the streets until I came before a splendid house, broad in its richness and strong in its build, having a border of gold astonishing the mind by the beauty of the work, showing curtains of silk embroidered with gold and in front of the door were two carpeted steps. I sat down upon one of them and began to think of myself and of the events that had happened to me and of my ignorance of what had taken place after my departure. In the midst of my sadness at the contemplation of my troubles (and the wind blowing upon me) I fell asleep and I awaked not until a sprinkling of water came down upon me. On opening my eyes I saw a young woman behind the curtain dressed in a morning gown and a Sa'údí fillet upon her forehead. Her look and eyelids were full of art and her eyebrows were like the fronts of the wings of light. The Rawi says she resembled a full moon. When my eyes fell upon her (continued Ja'afar) and looked at her, that look brought with it a thousand sighs and I arose and my disposition was changed. The young woman cried at me and I said, I am your servant, O my lady, and here at your command, but said she, No labbayka and no favour for you! Is this house thine? Said I, No my lady, and she replied, O dog of the streets, this house is not thine, why art you sitting here? When Ja'afar heard this he was greatly mortified, but he took courage and dissimulated, answering, O my lady, I am resting here only to recite some verses which I have composed for you, then she asked, And what have you said about me? He continued:—

She appeared in a whitish robe with eyelids and glances of wonder, I said she came out without greeting, with her I'm content to my heart's content. Blessed be He that clothed your cheeks with roses, He can create what He wills without hindrance. Thy dress like your lot is as my hand, white, and they are white upon white upon my white.

When he had finished these verses he said, I have composed others on your expression, and recited the following:—

Dost you see through her veil that face appearing how it shines, like the moon in the horizon? Its splendour enlightens the shade of her temples and the sun enters into obscurity by system; Her forehead eclipses the rose and the apple, and her look and expression enchant the people; It is she that if mortal should see her he'd become victim of love, of the fires of desire.

On hearing this recitation the young lady said to Ja'afar, Miserable fellow, what is this discourse which does not belong to the like of you? Get up and begone with the malediction of Allah and the protection of Satan. Ja'afar arose, seized with a mighty rage in addition to his love; and in this love for her he departed and returned to the house of his friend Attaf and saluted him with a prepossessed heart. As soon as Attaf saw him he cast himself on his breast and kissed him between the eyes, saying to him, O my lord, you have made me feel desolate to-day by your absence. Then Attaf, looking in the face of Ja'afar and reading in it many words, continued to him, O my lord, I find your countenance changed and your mind broken. Ja'afar answered, O my lord, since I left you up to the present time I have been suffering with a headache and a nervous attack for I was sleeping upon my ear. The people in the mosk recited the afternoon prayer without my knowing it, and now I have a mind to get an hour's sleep, probably I shall find repose for the body, and what I suffer will pass off. Accordingly, Attaf went into the house and ordered cushions to be brought out and a bed to be made for him. Ja'afar then stretched himself upon it depressed and out of spirits, and covering himself up began to think of the young lady and of the offensive words she gave him so contrary to usage. Also he thoguht of her beauty and the elegance of her stature and perfect proportions and of what Allah (to whom be praise!) had granted her of magnificence. He forgot all that happened to him in other days and also his affair with the Caliph and his people and his friends and his society. Such was the burden of his thoughts until he was taken with monomania and his body wasted. Hereupon Attaf sent for doctors, they surrounded him constantly, they employed all their talents for him, but they could find no remedy. So he remained during a certain time without anyone being able to discover what was the matter with him. The breast of Attaf became straitened, he renounced all diversions and pleasures, and Ja'afar getting worse and worse, his trouble augmented. One day a new doctor arrived, a man of experience in the art of gallantry, whose name was Dabdihkán. When he came to Ja'afar and looked at his face and felt his pulse and found everything in its place, no suffering, no pain, he comprehended that he was in love, so he took a paper and wrote a prescription and placed it beneath Ja'afar's head. He then said, your remedy is under your head, I've prescribed a purge, if you take it you will get well, for he was ashamed to tell Attaf his love-sick condition. Presently, the Doctor went away to other patients and Attaf arose and when about entering to see Ja'afar he heard him recite the following verses:—

A doctor came to me one day and took my hand and pulse, when I said to him Let go my hand, the fire's in my heart. He said, Drink syrup of the rose and mix it well with water of the tongue but tell it not to anyone: I said, The syrup of the rose is quite well known to me; it is the water of the cheek that breaks my very heart; But can it be that I can get the water of the tongue that I may cool the burning fire that within me dwells? The doctor said, you art in love, I said Yes to him, and said he to me, Its remedy is to have the body here.

Then when Attaf went in to him after the end of the recitation he sat down at the head of the bed and asked him about his condition and what had been perscribed for him by the Hakím. Ja'afar said, O my lord, he wrote for me a paper which is under the pillow. Attaf put out his hand, took the paper and read it and found upon it written:—"In the name of God the Curer—To be taken, with the aid and blessing of God, 3 miskals of pure presence of the beloved unmixed with morsels of absence and fear of being watched: plus, 3 miskals of a good meeting cleared of any grain of abandonment and rupture: plus, 2 okes of pure friendship and discretion deprived of the wood of separation. Then take some extract of the incense of the kiss, the teeth and the waist, 2 miskals of each; also take 100 kisses of pomegranate rubbed and rounded, of which 50 small ones are to be sugared, 30 pigeon-fashion and 20 after the fashion of little birds. Take of Aleppine twist and sigh of Al-Iráq 2 miskals each; also 2 okes of tongue-sucking, mouth and lip kissing, all to be pounded and mixed. Then put upon a furnace 3 drams of Egyptian grain with the addition of the beautiful fold of plumpness, boil it in love-water and syrup of desire over a fire of wood of pleasure in the retreat of the ardour. Decant the whole upon a royal díbáqy divan and add to it 2 okes of saliva syrup and drink it fasting during 3 days. Next take for dinner the melon of desire mixed with embrace-almond and juice of the lemon of concord, and lastly 3 rolls of thigh-work and enter the bath for the benefit of your health. And—The Peace!" When Attaf had finished reading of this paper he burst into a laugh at the prescription and, turning to Ja'afar, he asked him with whom he was in love and of whom he was enamoured. Ja'afar gave no answer, he spoke not neither did he commence any discourse, when Attaf said, O my brother, you are not my friend, but you art in my house esteemed as is the soul in the body. Between me and you there has been for the last four months friendship, company, companionship and conversation. Why then conceal your situation? For me, I have fear and sorrow on your account. you art a stranger, you art not of this capital. I am a son of this city, I can dispel what you have (of trouble) and that of which you sufferest. By my life, which belongs to you, by the bread and salt between us, reveal to me your secret. And Attaf did not cease to speak thus until Ja'afar yielded and said to him, It shall no longer be concealed, and I will not blame those who are in love and are impatient. Then he told his story from beginning to end, what was said to him by the young lady and what she did with him and lastly he described the quarter and the place. Now when Attaf heard the words of Ja'afar he reflected on the description of the house and of the young lady and concluded that the house was his house and the young lady was his cousin-wife, and said to himself, There is no power nor strength but in Allah the High, the Great. We are from God and to Him we return. Then he came to his mind again and to the generosity of his soul and said to himself, O Attaf! God has favored me and has made me worthy of doing good and has sent to me I know not whence this stranger who has become bound in friendship with me during all this time and he has acquired over me the ties of friendship. His heart has become attached to the young woman and his love for her has reached in him an imminent point. Since that time he is almost on the verge of annihilation, in so pitiable a condition and behold, he hopeth from me a good issue from his trouble. He has made known to me his situation after having concealed it for so long a time: if I do not befriend him in his misfortune I should resemble him who would build upon water and thus would aid him to annihilate his existence. By the magnanimity of my God, I will further him with my property and with my soul. I will divorce my cousin and will marry her to him and I will not change my character, my generosity nor my resolution. The Rawi says, that young woman was his wife and his cousin, also a second wife as he was previously married to another, and she occupied the house, his own house containing all that he possessed of property and so forth, servants, odalisques and slaves. There was also his other house which was for his guests, for drinking and eating and to receive his friends and his company. Of this, however, he said nothing to his cousin-wife when he came to see her at certain times. When he heard that Ja'afar was in love with her he could not keep from saying to him, Be quiet, I take upon myself to dispel your chagrin, and soon I shall have news of her, and if she is the daughter of the Naïb of Damascus I will take the proper steps for you even though I should lose all my property; and if she is a slave-girl I will buy her for you even were her price such as to take all I possess. Thus he calmed the anguish of Ja'afar the best way he could; then he went out from his own house and entered that of his cousin-wife without making any change in his habits or saying a single word save to his servants, Go to my uncle's and bring him to me. The boy then went for the uncle and brought him to Attaf, and when the uncle entered the nephew arose to receive him, embraced him and made him be seated, and, after he had been seated awhile, Attaf came to him and said, O my uncle! there is nothing but good! Know that when God wills good to his servitor he shows to him the way and my heart inclines to Meccah, to the house of God, to visit the tomb of Mohammed (for whom be the most noble of prayers and the most complete of salutations!). I have decided to visit those places this year and I cannot leave behind me either attachments or debts or obligations; nothing in fact that can disturb the mind, for no one can know who will be the friend of the morrow. Here, then, is the writ of divorce of your daughter and of my other wife. Now when his uncle heard that, he was troubled and exaggerating to himself the matter, he said, O son of my brother, what is it that impels you to this? If you depart and leave her and be absent as long as you willest she is yet your wife and your dependent which is sufficient. But Attaf said, O my uncle, what has been done is done. As soon as the young wife heard that, the abomination of desolation overcame her, she became as one in mourning and was upon the point of killing herself, because she loved her husband by reason of his relationship and his education. But this was done by Attaf only to please Ja'afar, and for that he was incited by his duty to do good to his fellow beings. Then Attaf left the house and said to himself, If I delay this matter it will be bruited abroad, and will come to the ears of my friend who will be afflicted and will be ashamed to marry, and what I have done will come to nothing. The divorce of Attaf's second spouse was only out of regard to his cousin-wife, and that there might not be an impediment to the success of his project. Then Attaf proceeded to his guesthouse and went in to Ja'afar, who when he saw him, asked where he had been. Attaf replied, Make yourself easy, O my brother, I am now occupied with your affair, I have sought out the young lady and I know her. She is divorced from her husband and her 'iddah is not yet expired, so expand your breast and gladden your soul, for when her obligatory term of waiting shall be accomplished I will marry her to you. And Attaf ceased not to diver him by eating and drinking, amusements and shows, song and songstress until he knew that the 'iddah of his cousin had ended; then he went to Ja'afar and said to him, Know, O my lord, that the father of the young woman you saw is one of my friends, and if I betroth her that would not be proper on my part and he will say: My friend has not done well in betrothing my daughter to a man who is a stranger and whom I know not. He will take her and carry her to his own country and we shall be separated. Now I have an idea that has occurred to me, and 'tis to send out for you a tent with ten mamelukes and four servants upon horses and mules, baggage, stuffs, chests of dresses, and horses and gilded vehicles. Everything I have mentioned will be placed outside the city that no one shall know of you, and I will say that you art Ja'afar the Barmeky the Caliph's Wazir. I will go to the Kady and the Wali and the Naïb and I will inform them of you (as Ja'afar); so will they come out to meet and salute you. Then you will salute them and tell them that you have come on business of the Caliph. you must also say you have heard that Damascus is a very fine city and a hospitable, and add, I will go in to visit it and if it prove favourable to me I will remain and marry to establish between myself and its inhabitants relationship and friendship, and I would like you to seek for me a man of high position and noble origin who has a beautiful cousin that I may marry. Attaf then said to Ja'afar, O my lord, we know one who has a daughter of noble origin, that man is such-and-such an one, ask her of him for betrothal and say to him, Here is her dowry, which is all that you have in the chests. Then produce a purse of a thousand dinars and distribute them among those present, and display the characteristic of the Barmekys, and take out a piece of silken stuff and order them to draw up the marriage contract immediately. If they sign it, declare to them that you will not enter the city because you art pressed and your bride will come to you. Should you do thus, you will accomplish what you desirest, God willing, then leave instantly and order that the tents be struck, the camels loaded, and set out for your own country in peace. Know that all I shall do for you is little for the rights of friendship and devotedness. Ja'afar sprang up to kiss the hand of Attaf, but was prevented, then he thanked him and praised him and passed the night with him. The next morning at break of day he arose, made his ablutions, and having recited his morning prayer, accompanied his host to the outside of the city. Attaf ordered a great tent to be pitched and that everything necessary should be carried to it; of horses, camels, mules, slaves, mamelukes, chests containing all kinds of articles for distribution, and boxes holding purses of gold and silver. He dressed his guest in a robe worthy of a Wazir, and set up for him a throne and sent some slaves to the Naïb of Damascus to announce the arrival of Ja'afar on business of the Caliph. As soon as the Naïb of Damascus was informed of that, he went out accompanied by the notables of the city and of his government and met the Wazir Ja'afar, and kissing the ground between his hands, said to him, O my lord, why did you not inform me sooner in order that we might be prepared for your arrival. Ja'afar said, That was not necessary, may God augment your wealth, I have not come but with the intention to visit this city; I desire to stay in it for some time and I would also marry in it. I have learned that the Amír 'Amr has a daughter of noble descent, I wish you would cause her to be brought before you and that you betroth her to me. The Naïb of Damascus said, Hearing is obeying. Her husband has divorced her and desireth to go to al-Hejaz on the pilgrimage, and after her 'iddah has expired and there remaineth not any impediment the betrothal can take place. At the proper time the Naïb of Damascus caused to be present the father of the lady and spoke to him of what the Wazir Ja'afar had said and that he should betroth his daughter, so that there was nothing more for the father to say than, I hear and I obey. The Rawi says that Ja'afar ordered to be brought the dress of honor and the gold from the purses to be thrown out for distribution and commanded the presence of the Kady and witnesses; and, when they arrived, he bade them write the marriage contract. Then he brought forward and presented the ten chests and the ten purses of gold, the dowry of the bride, and all those present, high and low, and rich and poor gave him their best wishes and congratulations. After the father of the lady had taken the dowry he ordered the Kady to draw up the contract and presented to him a piece of satin; he also called for sugar-water to drink and set before them the table of viands, and they ate and washed their hands. Afterwards they served sweet dishes and fruits; and when that was finished and the contract passed, the Naïb of Damascus said to the Wazir, O my lord, I will prepare a house for your residence and for the reception of your wife. Ja'afar said, That cannot be; I am here on a commission of the Commander of the Faithful, and I wish to take my wife with me to Baghdad and only there can I have the bridal ceremonies. The father of the lady said, Enter unto your bride and depart when you wilt. Ja'afar replied, I cannot do that, but I wish you to make up the trousseau of your daughter and have it ready so as to depart this very day. We only wait, said the father of the bride, for the Naïb of Damascus to retire, to do what the Wazir commands. He answered, With love and good will; and the lady's father set about getting together the trousseau and making her ready. He took her out and got her trousseau, mounted her upon a Hodaj, and when she arrived at Ja'afar's camp her people made their adieus and departed. When Ja'afar had ridden to some distance from Damascus and had arrived at Tiniat el 'Iqáb he looked behind him and perceived in the distance in the direction of Damascus a horseman galloping towards him; so he stopped his attendants and when the rider had come near them Ja'afar looked at him and behold it was Attaf. He had come out after him and cried, Hasten not, O my brother. And when he came up he embraced him and said, O my lord, I have found no rest without you, O my brother Abu 'l-Hasan, it would have been better for me never to have seen you nor known you, for now I cannot support your absence. Ja'afar thanked him and said to him, I have not been able to act against what you have prescribed for me and provided, but we pray God to bring near our reunion and never more separate us. He is Almighty to do what He willeth. After that Ja'afar dismounted and spread a silken carpet and they sat down together, and Attaf laid a tablecloth with duck, chicken, sweets and other delicacies, of which they ate and he brought out dry fruits and wine. They drank for an hour of the day when they remounted their horses and Attaf accompanied Ja'afar a way on the journey, when Ja'afar said to him, Every departer must return, and he pressed him to his breast and kissed him and said to him, O my brother Abu 'l-Hasan, do not interrupt the sending of your letters; but make known to me about yourself, and your condition as if I were present with you. Then they bade each other adieu and each went on his way. When the young wife noticed that the camels had stopped on their march as well as their people, she put out her head from the Hodaj and saw her cousin dismounting with Ja'afar and they eating and drinking together and then in company to the end of the road where they bade adieu exchanging a recitation of poetry. So she said, The one, Wallahy, is my cousin Attaf and the other the man whom I saw seated under the window, and upon whom I sprinkled the water. Doubtless he is the friend of my cousin. He has been seized with love for me, and complaining to my cousin, has given him a description of me and of my house; and the devotedness of his character and the greatness of his soul must have impelled him to divorce me and to take steps to marry me to that man. The Rawi says that Attaf in bidding good-bye to Ja'afar left him joyful in the possession of the young lady for whom he was on the point of ruin by his love, and in having made the friendship of Attaf whom he intended to reward in gratitude for what he had done by him. So glad was he to have the young wife that everything that had taken place with Er-Rashid had passed out of his mind. In the meanwhile she was crying and lamenting over what had happened to her, her separation from her cousin and from her parents and her country, and bemoaning what she did and what she had been; and her scalding tears flowed while she recited these verses:—

I weep for these places and these beauties; blame not the lover if some day he's insane: For the places the dear ones inhabit. O praise be to God! how sweet is their dwelling! God protect the past days while with you, my dear friends, and in the same house may happiness join us!

On finishing this recitation she wept and lamented and recited again:—

I'm astonished at living without you at the troubles that come upon us: I wish for you, dear absent ones, my wounded heart is still with you.

Then, still crying and lamenting, she went on:—

O you to whom I gave my soul, return; from you I wish'd to pluck it, but could not succeed: Then pity the rest of a life that I've sacrificed for you, before the hour of death my last look I will take: If all of you be lost astonished I'll not be; my astonishment would be that his lot will be to another.

Presently the Wazir Ja'afar coming up to the Hodaj said to the young wife, O mistress of the Hodaj, you have killed us. When she heard this address she called to him with dejection and humility, We ought not to talk to you for I am the cousin-wife of your friend and companion Attaf, prince of generosity and devotion. If there be in you any feeling of the self-denial of a man you will do for him that which, in his devotion, he has done for you. When Ja'afar heard these words he became troubled and taking in the magnitude of the situation he said to the young lady, O thou! you art then his cousin-wife? and said she, Yes! it is I whom you saw on such a day when this and that took place and your heart attached itself to me. you have told him all that. He divorced me, and while waiting for the expiration of my 'iddah diverted you that such and such was the cause of all my trouble. Now I have explained to you my situation: do you the action of a man. When Ja'afar heard these words he uttered a loud cry and said, We are from God and to Him we return. O thou! you art now to me an interdiction and have become a sacred deposit until your return to where it may please you. Then said Ja'afar to a servant, Take good care of your mistress. After which they set foward and travelled on day and night. Now Er-Rashid, after the departure of Ja'afar, became uneasy and sorrowful at his absence. He lost patience and was tormented with a great desire to see him again, while he regretted the conditions he had imposed as impossible to be complied with and obliging him to the extremity of tramping about the country like a vagabond, and forcing him to abandon his native land. He had sent envoys after him to search for him in every place, but he had never received any news of him, and was cast into great embarrassment by reason of his absence. He was always waiting to hear of him, and when Ja'afar had approached Baghdad and he, Er-Rashid, had received the good tidings of his coming, he went forth to meet him, and as soon as they came together they embraced each other, and the Caliph became content and joyful. They entered together into the palace and the Prince of True Believers seating Ja'afar at his side, said to him, Relate to me your story where you have been during your absence and what you have come upon. So Ja'afar told him then all that had happened from the time he left him until the moment of finding himself between his hands. Er-Rashid was greatly astonished and said, Wallahy, you have made me sorrowful for your absence, and have inspired me with great desire to see your friend. My opinion is that you divorce this young lady and put her on the road homeward accompanied by someone in whom you have confidence. If your friend have an enemy he shall be our enemy, and if he have a friend he also shall be ours; after which we will make him come to us, and we shall see him and have the pleasure of hearing him and pass the time with him in joy. Such a man must not be neglected, we shall learn, by his generosity, bounty and useful things. Ja'afar answered, To hear is obedience. Then Ja'afar apportioned to the young lady a spacious house and servants and a handsome enclosure; and he treated with generosity those who had come with her as suite and followers. He also sent to her sets of furniture, mattresses and every thing else she might need, while he never intruded upon her and never saw her. He sent her his salutation and reassuring words that she should be returned to her cousin; and he made her a monthly allowance of a tousand dinars, besides the cost of her living. So far as to Ja'afar; but as to Attaf, when he had bidden adieu to Ja'afar and had returned to his country, those who were jealous of him took steps to ruin him with the Naïb of Damascus, to whom they said, O our lord, what is it that has made you neglect Attaf? Dost you not know that the Wazir was his friend and that he went out after him to bid him adieu after our people had returned, and accompanied him as far as Katifa, when Ja'afar said to him, Hast you need of anything O Attaf? he said Yes. Of what? asked the Wazir, and he answered, That you send me an imperial rescript removing the Naïb of Damascus. Now this was promised to him, and the most prudent thing is that you invite him to breakfast before he takes you to supper; success is in the opportunity and the assaulted profiteth by the assaulter. The Naïb of Damascus replied, you has spoken well, bring him to me immediately. The Naïb of Damascus replied, you have spoken well, bring him to me immediately. The Rawi says that Attaf was in his own house, ignorant that anyone owed him grudge, when suddenly in the night he was surrounded and seized by the people of the Naïb of Damascus armed with swords and clubs. They beat him until he was covered with blood, and they dragged him along until they set him in presence of the Pasha of Damascus who ordered the pillage of his house and of his slaves and his servants and all his property and they took everything, his family and his domestics and his goods. Attaf asked, What is my crime? and he answered, O scoundrel, you art an ignorant fellow of the rabble, dost dispute with the Naïbat of Damascus? Then the Swordman was ordered to strike his neck, and the man came forward and, cutting off a piece of his robe, with it blindfolded his eyes, and was about to strike his neck when one of the Emírs arose and said, Be not hasty, O my lord, but wait, for haste is the whisper of Satan, and the proverb saith: Man gaineth his ends by patience, and error accompanieth the hasty man. Then he continued, Do not press the matter of this man; perhaps he who has spoken of him lieth and there is nobody without jealousy; so have patience, for you may have to regret the taking of his life unjustly. Do not rest easy upon what may come to you on the part of the Wazir Ja'afar, and if he learn what you have done by this man be not sure of your life on his part. He will admit of no excuse for he was his friend and companion. When the Naïb of Damascus heard that he awoke from his slumber and conformed to the words of the Emir. He ordered that Attaf should be put in prison, enchained and with a padlock upon his neck, and bade them, after severely tightening the bonds, illtreat him. They dragged him out, listening neither to his prayers nor his supplications; and he cried every night, doing penance to God and praying to Him for deliverance from his affliction and his misfortune. In that condition he remained for three months. But one night as he woke up he humiliated himself before God and walked about his prison, where he saw no one; then, looking before him, he espied an opening leading from the prison to the outside of the city. He tried himself against his chain and succeeded in opening it; then, taking it from his neck, he went out from the gaol running at full speed. He concealed himself in a place, and darkness protected him until the opening of the city gate, when he went out with the people and hastening his march he arrived at Aleppo and entered the great mosk. There he saw a crod of strangers on the point of departure and Attaf asked them where they were going, and they answered, To Baghdad. Whereupon he cried, And I with you. They said, Upon the earth is our weight, but upon Allah is our nourishment. Then they went on their march until they arrived at Koufa after a travel of twenty days, and then continued journeying till they came to Baghdad. Here Attaf saw a city of strong buildings, and very rich in elegant palaces reaching to the clouds, a city containing the learned and the ignorant, and the poor and the rich, and the virtuous and the evil doer. He entered the city in a miserable dress, rags upon his shoulders, and upon his head a dirty, conical cap, and his hair had become long and hanging over his eyes and his entire condition was most wretched. He entered one of the mosks. For two days he had not eaten. He sat down, when a vagabond entered the mosk and seating himself in front of Attaf threw off from his shoulder a bag from which he took out bread and a chicken, and bread again and sweets and an orange, and olive and date-cake and cucumbers. Attaf looked at the man and at his eating, which was as the table of 'Isa son of Miriam (upon whom be peace!). For four months he had not had a sufficient meal and he said to himself, I would like to have a mouthful of this good cheer and a piece of this bread, and then cried for very hunger. The fellow looked at him and said, Bravo! why dost you squint and do what strangers do? By the protection of God, if you weep tears enough to fill the Jaxartes and the Bactrus and the Dajlah and the Euphrates and the river of Basrah and the stream of Antioch and the Orontees and the Nile of Egypt and the Salt Sea and the ebb and the flow of the Ocean, I will not let you taste a morsel. But, said the buffoon, if you wish to eat of chicken and white bread and lamb and sweets and mutton patties, go you to the house of Ja'afar son of Yahya the Barmeky, who has received hospitality from a Damascus man named Attaf. He bestoweth charity in honor of him in this manner, and he neither getteth up nor sitteth down without speaking of him. Now when Attaf heard these words from the buffoon he looked up to heaven and said, O you whose attributes are inscrutable, bestow your benefits upon your servant Attaf. Then he recited this couplet:—

Confide your affairs to your Creator; set aside your pains and dismiss your thoughts.

Then Attaf went to a paper-seller and got from him a piece of paper and borrowed an inkstand and wrote as follows:—From your brother Attaf whom God knoweth. Let him who has possessed the world not flatter himself, he will some day be cast down and will lose it in his bitter fate. If you see me you will not recognise me for my poverty and my misery; and, because of the change in situation and the reverses of the times, my soul and body are reduced by hunger, by the long journey I have made, until at last I have come to you. And peace be with you. Then he folded the paper and returning the pencase to its owner asked for the house of Ja'afar, and when it was shown to him he went there and stood at a distance before it. The doorkeepers saw him standing, neither commencing nor repeating a word, and nobody spoke to him, but as he was thus standing embarassed, an eunuch dressed in a striped robe and golden belt passed by him. Attaf remained, motionless before him, then went up to him, kissed his hands and said to him, O my lord, the Apostle of Allah (upon whom be peace and salutation) has said, The medium of a good deed is like him who did it, and he who did it belongeth to the dwellers in heaven. The man said to him, What is your need? and said he, I desire of your goodness to send in this paper to your lord and say to him, your brother Attaf is standing at the door. When the servant heard his words he got into a great and excessive rage so that his eyes swelled in his head and he asked, O cursed one, you art then the brother of the Wazir Ja'afar! and as he had in his hand a rod with a golden end, he struck Attaf with it in the face and his blood flowed and he fell full length to the ground in his weakness from weeping and from receiving the blow. The Rawi says that God has placed the instinct of good in the heart of some domestics, even as he has placed that of evil in the heart of others. Another of the domestics was raised up against his companion by good will to Attaf and reproved him for striking the stranger and was answered, Didst you not hear, O brother, that he pretended to be the brother of the Wazir Ja'afar? and the second one said, O man of evil, son of evil, slave of evil, O cursed one, O hog! is Ja'afar one of the prophets? is he not a dog of the earth like ourselves? Men are all brethren, of one father and one mother, of Adam and of Eve; and the poet has said:—

Men by comparison all are brethren, their father is Adam their mother is Eve;

but certain people are preferable to others. Then he came up to Attaf and made him be seated and wiped off the blood from his face and washed him and shook off the dust that was upon him and said, O my brother, what is your need? and said he, My need is the sending of this paper to Ja'afar. The servant took the paper from his hand and going in to Ja'afar the Barmeky found there the officers of the Governor and the Barmekys standing at his service on his right and on his left; and Ja'afar the Wazir who held in his hand a cup of wine was reciting poetry and playing and saying, O you all here assembled, the absent from the eye is not like the present in the heart; he is my brother and my friend and my benefactor, Attaf of Damascus, who was continuous in his generosity and his bounty and his benfactions to me; who for me divorced his cousin-wife and gave her to me. He made me presents of horses and slaves and damsels and stuffs in quantities that I might furnish her dower; and, if he had not acted thus, I should certainly have been ruined. He was my benefactor without knowing who I was, and generous to me without any idea of profiting by it. The Rawi says that when the good servant heard these words from his lord he rejoiced and coming forward he kneeled down before him and presented the paper. When Ja'afar read it he was in a state of intoxication and not being able to discern what he was doing he fell on his face to the floor while holding the paper and the glass in his hand, and he was wounded in the forehead so his blood ran and he fainted and the paper fell from his grasp. When the servant saw that he hastened to depart fearing the consequence; and the Wazir Ja'afar's friends seated their lord and staunched the blood. They exclaimed, There is no power and strength but in God the High, the Mighty. Such is the character of servants; they trouble the life of kings in their pleasures and annoy them in their humours: Wallahy, the writer of this paper merits nothing less than to be handed over to the Wali who shall give him five hundred lashes and put him in prison. Thereupon the Wazir's doorkeeper went out and asked for the owner of the paper, when Attaf answered, 'Tis I, O my lord. Then they seized him and sent him to the Wali and ordered him to give one hundred blows of the stick to the prisoner and to write upon his chain "for life." Thus they did with Attaf and carried him to the prison where he remained for two months when a child was born to Harun er-Rashid, who then ordered that alms should be distributed, and good done to all, and bade liberate all that were in prison and among those that were set free was Attaf. When he found himself out of gaol, beaten and famished and naked, he looked up to heaven and exclaimed, Thanks be to you, O Lord, in every situation, and crying said, It must be for some fault committed by me in the past, for God had taken me into favour and I have said repaid Him in disobedience; but I pray to Him for pardon for having gone too far in my debauchery. Then he recited these verses:—

O God! the worshipper doth what he should not do; he is poor, depending on you: In the pleasures of life he forgetteth himself, in his ignorance, pardon you his faults.

Then he cried again and said to himself, What shall I do? If I set out for my country I may not reach it; if I arrive there, there will be no safety for my life on teh part of the Naïb, and if I remain here nobody knoweth me among the beggars and I cannot be for them of any use nor for myself as an aid or an intermediate. As for me, I had hope in that man, that he would raise me from my poverty. The affair has turned out contrary to my expectations, and the poet was right when he said:—

O friend, I've run o'er the world west and east; all that I met with was pain and fatigue: I've frequented the men of the age, but never have found e'en a friend grateful not even to me.

Once more he cried and exclaimed, God give me the grace of patience. After that he got up and walked away, and entered one of the mosks and staid there until afternoon. His hunger increased and he said, By your magnanimity and your majesty I shall ask nothing of anyone but of you. He remained in the mosk until it became dark when he went out for something, saying to himself, I have heard a call from the Prophet (on whom be the blessing and peace of Allah!) which said, God forbiddeth sleep in the Sanctuary and forbiddeth it to His worshippers. Then he arose, and went out from the mosk to some distance when he entered a ruined building after walking an hour, and here he stumbled in the darkness and fell upon his face. He saw something before him that he had struck with his foot and felt it move, and this was a lad that had been slain and a knife was in his side. Attaf rose up from off the body, his clothes stained with blood; he stood motionless and embarrassed, and while in that situation the Wali and his policemen stood at the door of the ruin and Attaf said to them, Come in and search. They entered with their torches and found the body of the murdered lad and the knife in him and the miserable Attaf standing at the head with his clothes stained with blood. When a man with a scarf saw him he arrested him and said to him, O Wretch, 'tis you killedst him. Attaf said, Yes. Then said the Wali, Pinion him and take him to prison until we make our report to the Wazir Ja'afar. If he orders his death we will execute him. They did as ordered, and the next day the man with the scarf wrote to the Wazir, We went into a ruin and found there a man who had killed a lad and we interrogated him and he confessed that it was he who had done the deed, what are your orders? The Wazir commanded them to put him to death; so they took Attaf from the prison to the place of execution and cut off a piece of his garment and with it bandaged his eyes. The Sworder said, O my lord, shall I strike his neck? and the Wali said, Strike! He brandished the sword which whistled and glittered in the air and was about to strike, when a cry from behind, Stop your hand! was heard, and it was the voice of the Wazir Ja'afar who was out on a promenade. The Wali went to him and kissed the earth before him and the Wazir said to him, What is this great gathering here? He answered, 'Tis the execution of a young man of Damascus whom we found yesterday in a ruin; he had killed a lad of noble blood and we found the knife with him and his clothes spotted with blood. When I said to him, Is it you that killedst him? he replied Yes three times. To-day I sent to you my written report and your Excellency ordered his death, saying, Let the sentence of God be executed, and now I have brought him out that his neck may be struck. Ja'afar said, Oh, has a man of Damascus come into our country to find himself in a bad condition? Wallahy, that shall never be! Then he ordered that he should be brought to him. The Wazir did not recognise him, for Attaf's air of ease and comfort had disappeared; so Ja'afar said to him, From what country art thou, O young man, and he answered, I am a man from Damascus. From the city or from the villages? Wallahy, O my lord, from Damascus city where I was born. Ja'afar asked, Didst you happen to known there a man named Attaf? I know when you wast his friend and he lodged you in such-and-such a house and you wentest out to such-and-such a garden; and I know when you did marry his cousin-wife, I know when he bade adieu to you at Katifa where you drankest with him. Ja'afar said, Yes, all that is true, but what became of him after he left me? He said, O my Lord, there happened to him this and that and he related to him everything from the time he quitted him up to the moment of his standing before him and then recited these verses:—

This age, must it make me its victim, and you at the same time art living: wolves are seeking to devour me while you the lion art here. Every thirsty one that comes his thirst is quenched by you: can it be that I thirst while you art still our refuge?

When he had finished the verses he said, O my lord, I am Attaf, and then recalled all that had taken place between them from first to last. While he was thus speaking a great cry was heard, and it came from a Sheikh who was saying, This is not humanity. They looked at the speaker, who was an old man with trimmed beard dyed with henna, and upon him was a blue kerchief. When Ja'afar saw him he asked him what was the matter, and he exclaimed, Take away the young man from under the sword, for there is no fault in him: he has killed no one nor doth he know anything of the dead youth. Nobody but myself is the killer. The Wazir said, Then 'tis you that killed him? and he answered. Yes.—Why did you kill him? have you not the fear of God in killing a Hashimy child? The old man said, He was my servant, serving me in the house and working with me at my trade. Every day he took from me some quarter-pieces of money and went to work for another man called Shumooshag, and to work with Nagísh, and with Gasís, and with Ghúbar, and with Gushír, and every day working with someone. They were jealous of my having him. 'Odis the sweeper and Abu Butrán the stoker, and everyone wanted to have him. In vain I corrected him, but he would not abide corrected and ceased not to do thus until I killed him in the ruin, and I have delivered myself from the torment he gave me. That is my story. I kept silent until I saw you when I made myself known at the time you savest the head of this young man from the sword. Here I am standing before you: strike my neck and take life for life. Pray do no harm to this young man, for he has committed no fault. The Wazir said, Neither to you nor to him. Then he ordered to be brought the parents of the dead lad and reconciled them with the old man, whom he pardoned. He mounted Attaf upon a horse and took him to his house; then he entered the palace of the Caliph and kissed the earth before him and said, Behold Attaf, he who was my host at Damascus, and of whom I have related his treatment of me and his kindness and generosity, and how he preferred me to himself. Er-Rashid said, Bring him in to me immediately. He presented him to the Caliph in the miserable state in which he had found him; and when he entered, he made his salutations in the best manner and with the most eloquent language. Er-Rashid answered and said to him, What is this state in which I find you? and Attaf wept and made his complaint in these verses:—

Troubles, poverty and distant sojourn far away from the dear ones, and a crushing desire to see them: The soul is in them, they became like their fellows, thus the enigma remains in the world; While the generous is stricken with misfortune and grief, where's the miser that finds not good fortune therein?

When Attaf had finished he conversed with the Caliph about his history and all his life from beginning to end; and Er-Rashid cried and suffered at what had happened to him after the loss of his riches, nor did he cease to weep with Ja'afar until the close of Attaf's story. The Sheikh who had killed the lad and had been liberated by Ja'afar came in and Er-Rashid laughed at seeing him. Then he caused Attaf to be seated and made him repeat his story. And when Attaf had finished speaking the Caliph looked at Ja'afar and said, The proverb goeth:—

Good for good, to the giver the merit remains; evil for evil, the doer's most cruel.

Afterwards the Caliph said to Ja'afar, Tell me what you did for your brother Attaf before he came to you, and he answered, O Commander of the Faithful, he came upon me suddenly, and I now prepare for him three millions of gold, and the like of it in horses, and in slaves, and in boys, and in dresses; and the Caliph said, From me the same. Here endeth the last leaf of the writ, but the Wari says that two days afterwards Ja'afar restored to his friend Attaf his beloved cousin-wife, saying to him, I have divorced her and now I deliver over to you intact the precious deposit that you did place in my hands. Already has the order from the Caliph been despatched to Damascus enjoining the arrest of the Naïb, to place him in irons and imprison him until further notice. Attaf passed several months in Baghdad enjoying the pleasures of the city in company with his friend Ja'afar and Er-Rashid. He would have liked to have stayed there all his life, but numerous letters from his relations and his friends praying him to return to Damascus, he thought it his duty to do so, and asked leave of the Caliph, who granted it, not without regrets and fears for his future condition. Er-Rashid appointed him Wali of Damascus and gave him the imperial rescript; and a great escort of horses, mules and dromedaries, with abundant magnificent presents accompanied him as far as Damascus, where he was received with great pomp. All the city was illuminated as a mark of joy for the return of Attaf, so loved and respected by all classes of the people, and above all by the poor who had wept incessantly for him in his absence. As to the Naïb, a second decree of the Caliph ordered his being put to death for his oppression of the people, but by the generous intercession of Attaf Er-Rashid contented himself with commuting the sentence to banishment. Attaf governed his people many years with justice and prosperity, protector of his happy subjects and in the enjoyment of the delights and pleasures of life, until the Angel of Death overtook him and summoned him to Paradise.


History of Prince Habib and what Befel Him with the Lady Durrat Al-Ghawwas


Here we begin to indite the history of Sultan Habib and of what befell him with Durrat al-Ghawwas. [378]

It is related (but Allah is All-knowing of His unknown and All-cognisant of what took place and forewent in the annals of folk!) that there was, in days of yore and in times and tides long gone before, a tribe of the tribes of the Arabs named Banú Hilál [379] whose head men were the Emir Hilál and the Emir Salámah. [380] Now this Emir Salamah had well nigh told out his tale of days without having been blessed with boon of child; withal he was a ruler valiant, masterful, a fender of his foes and a noble knight of portly presence. He numbered by the thousand horsemen the notablest of cavaliers and he came to rule over three-score-and-six tribes of the Arabs.

One chance night of the nights as he lay sleeping in the sweetness of slumber, a Voice addressed him saying, "Rise immediately and know your wife, whereby she shall conceive under command of Allah Almighty." Being thus disturbed of his rest the Emir sprang up and compressed his spouse Kamar al-Ashráf; [381] she became pregnant by that embrace and when her days came to an end she bore a boy as the full moon of the fulness-night who by his father's hest was named Habíb. [382] And as time went on his sire rejoiced in him with joy exceeding and reared him with fairest rearing and bade them teach him Koran-reading together with the glorious names of Almighty Allah and instruct him in writing and in all the arts and sciences. After this he bestowed robes of honor and gifts of money and raiment upon the teachers who had made the Sultan [383] Habib, when he reached the age of seventeen, the most intelligent and penetrating and knowing among the sons of his time. And indeed men used to admire at the largeness of his understanding and were wont to say to themselves, "There is no help but that this youth shall rise to dignity (and what dignity!) whereof men of highmost intellect shall make loud mention." For he could write the seven caligraphs [384] and he could recite traditions and he could improvise poetry; and, on one occasion when his father bade him versify impromptu, that he might see what might come thereof, he intoned,

"O my sire, I am lord of all lere man knows or knew— * Have
enformed my vitals with lore and with legend true; Nor cease I repeat what knowledge
this memory guards * And my writ
as ruby and pearl doth appear to view."

So the Emir Salamah his sire marvelled at the elegance of his son's diction; and the Notables of the clan, after hearing his poetry and his prose, stood astounded at their excellence; and presently the father clasped his child to his breast and immediately summoned his governor, to whom there and then he did honor of the highmost. Moreover he largessed him with four camels carrying loads of gold and silver and he set him over one of his subject tribes of the Arabs; then said he to him, "Indeed you have done well, O Shaykh; so take this good and fare with it to such a tribe and rule it with justice and equity until the day of your death." Replied the governor, "O King of the Age, I may on no wise accept your boons, for that I am not of mankind but of Jinn-kind; nor have I need of money or requirement of rule. Know thou, O my lord, that erst I sat as Kázi among the Jinns and I was enthroned amid the Kings of the Jánn, when one night of the nights a Voice [385] addressed me in my sleep saying, 'Rise and go to the Sultan Habib son of the Emir Salamah ruler of the tribes of the Arabs subject to the Banu Hilal and become his tutor and teach him all things teachable; and, if you gainsay going, I will tear your soul from your body.' Now when I saw this marvel-vision in my sleep, I straightway arose and repairing to your son did as I was bidden." [386]

But as the Emir Salamah heard the words of this Shaykh he bowed him down and kissing his feet cried, "Alhamdolillah—laud to the Lord, who has vouchsafed you to us of His bounty; and indeed your coming to us was of good omen, O Judge of the Jann." "Where is your son?" said the governor, and said the father, "Ready, aye ready;" then he summoned his child and when the Shaykh looked upon his pupil he wept with sore weeping and cried, "Parting from you, O Habib, is heavy upon us," presently adding, "Ah! were you to know all that shall soon befall this youth after my departure and when afar from me!" [387] Those present in the assembly at once asked saying,

"And what shall, O Shaykh, to us fall forthright?"
* Said he, "Sore marvels shall meet your sight:
No heart have I to describe it you."
* Then approached Habib the same tutor-wight;
And clasping the youth to the breast of him,
* Kissed his cheek a-shrieking the shrillest shright. [388]

Whereupon all about them were perturbed and were amazed at the action of the Shaykh when, vanishing from their view, he could nowhere be seen. Then the Emir Salamah addressed the lieges saying, "Ho you Arabs, who know what presently shall betide my son? would Heaven I had one to advise him!" Hereupon said his Elders and Councillors, "We know of none." But the Sultan Habib brooded over the disappearance of his governor and bespoke his sire weeping bitter tears the while, "O my father, where is he who brought me up and enformed me with all manner knowledge?" and the Emir replied, "O my son, one day of the days he farewelled us and crying out with a loud cry vanished from our view and we have seen him no more." Thereupon the youth improvised and said,

"Indeed I am scourged by those ills whereof I felt affray, ah! * By
parting and thoughts which oft compellèd my soul to say, 'Ah!' Oh saddest regret in
vitals of me that ne'er ceaseth, nor * Shall
minished be his love that still on my heart doth prey, ah! Where has hied the generous
soul my mind with lere adorned? * And
alas! what has happened, O sire, to me, and well-away, ah!"

Hereat the Emir Salamah shed tears (as on like wise did all present) and said he to his son, "O Habib, we have been troubled by his action," and said the youth, "How shall I endure severance from one who fostered me and brought me to honor and renown and who raised my degree so high?" Then began he to improvise saying,

"Indeed this pine in my heart grows high, * And in eyeballs wake
doth my sleep outvie:
You marched, O my lords, and from me hied far * And you left a
lover shall aye outcry:
I wot not where on this earth you be * And how long this patience
when none is nigh:
Ye fared and my eyeballs your absence weep, * And my frame is
meagre, my heart is dry."

Now while the Emir Salamah was sitting in his seat of dignity and the Sultan Habib was improvising poetry and shedding tears in presence of his sire, they heard a Voice which announced itself and its sound was audible while its personality was invisible. Thereupon the youth shed tears and cried, "O father mine, I need one who shall teach me horsemanship and the accidents of edge and point and onset and offset and spearing and spurring in the Maydán; for my heart loves knightly derring-do to plan, such as riding in van and encountering the horseman and the valiant man."

And the while they were in such converse behold, there appeared before them a personage rounded of head, long of length and dread, with turband wide dispread, and his breadth of breast was armored with doubled coat of mail whose manifold rings were close-enmeshed after the model of Dáúd [389] the Prophet (upon whom be The Peace!). Moreover he held in hand a mace erst a block cut out of the live hard rock, whose shock would arrest forty braves of the doughtiest; and he was baldrick'd with an Indian blade that quivered in the grasp, and he bestrode, with a Samhari [390] lance at rest, a bay destrier of black points whose peer was not among the steeds of the Arabs. Then he took his station standing as a vassal between the Emir Salamah's hands and he addressed a general salam and he greeted all that stood a-foot or were seated. His salute they repealed and presently the pages hastened forwards and aided him alight from his charger's back; and after waiting for a full-told hour that he might take somewhat of repose, the stranger-knight and doughty wight advanced and said, "Ho you the Emir, I came hither to fulfil the want whereof you expressed a wish; and, if such prove your pleasure, I will teach your son fray and fight and prowess in the plain of sword-stroke and lance-lunge. But before so doing I would fain test your skill in cavalarice; so do thou, O Emir, be first to appear as champion and single combatant in the field when I will show you what horsemanship is."

"Hearkening and obeying," replied the Emir, "and if you desire the duello with us we will not baulk you thereof." Hereat his Shaykhs and Chieftains sprang up and cried to him, "O Emir, Allah upon you, do not meet in fight this cavalier for that you wottest not an he is of mankind or of Jinn-kind; so be you not deceived by his sleights and snares." "Suffer me this day," said the Emir, "to see the cavalarice of this cavalier, and, if over me he prevail, know him to be a knight with whom none may avail." Speaking thus the Emir arose and hied him to his tent where he bade the slaves bring forth the best of his habergeons; and, when all these were set before him, he took from them a Davidian suit of manifold rings and close-meshed, which he donned, and he baldrick'd himself with a scymitar of Hindi steel, had you smitten with it a cliff it had cleft it in twain or had you stricken a hill it had been laid level as a plain; and he hent in hand a Rudaynían lance [391] of Khatt Hajar, whose length was thirty ells and upon whose head sat a point like unto a basilisk's tongue; and lastly he bade his slaves bring him his courser which in the race was the fleetest-footed of all horses. Then the two combatants took the plain accompanied by the tribesmen nor did one of them all, or great or small, remain in camp for desire to witness the fight of these champions who were both as ravening lions. But first the stranger-knight addressed his adversary and speaking with free and eloquent tongue said he, "I will encounter you, O Emir Salamah, with the encountering of the valiant; so have you a heed of me for I am he has overthrown the Champions some and all."

At these words each engaged his foeman and the twain forwards pressed for a long time, and the Raven of cut-and-thrust croaked over the field of fight and they exchanged strokes with the Hindi scymitar and they thrust and foined with the Khatti spear and more than one blade and limber lance was shivered and splintered, all the tribesmen looking on the while at both. And they ceased not to attack and retire and to draw near and draw off and to heave and fence until their forearms ailed and their endeavour failed. Already there appeared in the Emir Salamah somewhat of weakness and weariness; natheless when he looked upon his adversary's skill in the tourney and encounter of braves he saw how to meet all the foeman's sword-strokes with his targe: however at last fatigue and loss of strength prevailed over him and he knew that he had no longer the force to fight; so he stinted his endeavour and withdrew from brunt of battle. Hereat the stranger-knight alighted and falling at the Emir's feet kissed them and cried, "O Sovran of the Age, I came not hither to war with you but rather with the design of teaching your son, the Sultan Habib, the complete art of arms and make him the prow cavalier of his day." Replied Salamah, "In very sooth, O horseman of the age, you have spoken right fairly in your speech; nor did I design with you to fight nor devised I the duello or from steed to alight; [392] nay, my sole object was my son to incite that he might learn battle and combat aright, and the charge of the heroic Himyarite [393] to meet with might." Then the twain dismounted and each kissed his adversary; after which they returned to the tribal camp and the Emir bade decorate it and all the habitations of the Arab clans with choicest decoration, and they slaughtered the victims and spread the banquets and throughout that day the tribesmen ate and drank and fed the travellers and every wayfarer and the mean and mesquin and all the miserables.

Now as soon as the Sultan Habib was informed concerning that cavalier how he had foiled his father in the field of fight, he repaired to him and said, "Peace be with him who came longing for us and designing our society! Who art thou, Ho you the valorous knight and foiler of foemen in fight?" Said the other, "Learn thou, O Habib, that Allah has sent me youwards." "And, say me, what may be your name?" "I am hight Al-'Abbús, [394] the Knight of the Grim Face." "I see you only smiling of countenance while your name clean contradicteth your nature;" said the youth. Presently the Emir Salamah committed his son to the new governor saying, "I would you make me this youth the Brave of his epoch;" whereto the knight replied, "To hear is to obey, first Allah then yourself and to do suit and service of your son Habib."

And when this was determined youth and governor went forth to the Maydan every day and after a while of delay Habib became the best man of his age in fight and fray. Seeing this his teacher addressed him as follows. "Learn, O Sultan Habib, that there is no help but you witness perils and affrights and adventures, wherefor is weak the description of describers and you shall say in yourself, 'Would heaven I had never sighted such and I were of these same free.' And you shall fall into every hardship and horror until you be united with the beautiful Durrat al-Ghawwás, Queen-regnant over the Isles of the Sea. Meanwhile to affront all the perils of the path you shall fare forth from your folk and bid adieu to your tribe and patrial stead; and, after enduring that which amateth man's wit, you shall win union with the daughter of Queen Kamar al-Zamán." [395] But when Habib heard these words concerning the "Pearl of the Diver" his wits were wildered and his senses were agitated and he cried to Al-Abbús, "I conjure you by Allah say me, is this damsel of mankind or of Jinn-kind." Said the other, "Of Jinn-kind, and she has two Wazirs, one of either race, who overrule all her rulers, and a thousand islands of the Isles of the Sea are subject to her command, while a host of Sayyids and Sharífs [396] and Grandees has flocked to woo her, bringing wealthy gifts and noble presents, yet has not any of them won his wish of her but all returned baffled and baulked of their will." Now the Sultan Habib hearing this from him cried in excess of perturbation and stress of confusion, "Up with us and hie we home where we may take seat and talk over such troublous matter and debate about its past and its future." "Hearkening and obedience," rejoined the other; so the twain retired into privacy in order to converse at ease concerning the Princess, and Al-Abbus began to relate in these words—


The History of Durrat al-Ghawwas


Whilome there was a Sovran among the Kings of the Sea, hight Sábúr, who reigned over the Crystalline Isles, [397] and he was a mighty ruler and a generous, and a masterful potentate and a glorious. He loved women and he was at trouble to seek out the fairest damsels; yet many of his years had gone by nor yet had he been blessed with boon of boy. So one day of the days he took thought and said in himself, "To this length of years I have attained and am well nigh at life's end and still am I childless: what then will be my case?" Presently, as he sat upon his throne of kingship, he saw enter to him an Ifrit fair of face and form, the which was none other than King 'Atrús [398] of the Jánn, who cried, "The Peace be upon you, Ho you the King! and know that I have come to you from my liege lord who affecteth you. In my sleep it befell that I heard a Voice crying to me, 'During all the King's days never has he been vouchsafed a child, boy or girl; so now let him accept my command and he shall win to his wish. Let him distribute justice and largesse and further the rights of the wronged and bid men to good and forbid them from evil and lend not aid to tyranny or to innovation in the realm and persecute not the unfortunate, and release from gaol all the prisoners he retaineth.' At these words of the Voice I awoke astartled by my vision and I hastened to you without delay and I come with design to inform you, O King of the Age, that I have a daughter, hight Kamar al-Zaman, who has none like her in her time, and no peer in this tide, and her I design giving you to bride. The Kings of the Jann have ofttimes asked her in marriage of me but I would have none of them save a ruler of men like yourself and Alhamdolillah—glory be to God, who caused your Highness occur to my thought, for that your fame in the world is goodly fair and your works make for righteousness. And perhaps by the blessing of these you shall beget upon my daughter a man child, a pious heir and a virtuous."

Replied the King, "Ho you who comest to us and desirest our weal, I accept your offer with love and good will." Then Sabur, the King of the Crystalline Isles, bade summon the Kazi and witnesses, and said the Ifrit, "I agree to what you sayest, and whatever you proposest that will I not oppose." So they determined upon the dowry and bound him by the bond of marriage with the daughter of Al-'Atrus, King of the Jinns, who at once sent one of his Flying Jann to bring the bride. She arrived immediately when they dressed and adorned her with all manner ornaments, and she came forth surpassing all the maidens of her era. And when King Sabur went in unto her he found her a clean maid: so he lay that night with her and Almighty Allah so willed that she conceived of him.

When her days and months of pregnancy were sped, she was delivered of a girl-babe as the moon, whom they committed to wet-nurses and dry-nurses, and when she had reached her tenth year, they set over her duennas who taught her Koran-reading and writing and learning and belles-lettres; brief, they brought her up after the fairest of fashions. Such was the lot [399] of Durrat al-Ghawwas, the child of Kamar al-Zaman, daughter to King 'Atrus by her husband King Sabur. But as regards the Sultan Habib and his governor Al-Abbus, the twain ceased not wandering from place to place in search of the promised damsel until one day of the days when the youth entered his father's garden and strolled the walks adown amid the borders [400] and blossoms of basil and of rose full blown and solaced himself with the works of the Compassionate One and enjoyed the scents and savours of the flowers there bestrown; and, while thus employed, behold, he suddenly espied the maiden, Durrat al-Ghawwas hight, entering therein as she were the moon; and nothing could be lovelier than she of all earth supplies, gracious as a Huriyah of the Virgins of Paradise, to whose praise no praiser could avail on any wise.

But when the Sultan Habib cast upon her his eyes he could no longer master himself and his wits were bewildered from the excitement of his thoughts; so he regarded her with a long fixed look and said in himself, "I fear when she see me that she will vanish from my sight." Accordingly, he retired and clomb the branches of a tree in a stead where he could not be seen and whence he could see her at his ease. But as regards the Princess, she ceased not to roam about the Emir Salamah's garden until there approached her two score of snow-white birds each accompanied by a handmaid of moon-like beauty. Presently they settled upon the ground and stood between her hands saying, "Peace be upon you, O our Queen and Sovran Lady." She replied, "No welcome to you and no greeting; say me, what delayed you until this hour when you know that I am longing to meet the Sultan Habib, the dear one, son of Salamah, and I long to visit him for that he is the dearling of my heart. Wherefor I bade you accompany me and you obeyed not, and perhaps you have made mock of me and of my commandment." "We never gainsay your behest," replied they, "or in word or in deed;" and they fell to seeking her beloved. Hearing this the Sultan Habib's heart was solaced and his mind was comforted and his thoughts were rightly directed and his soul was reposed; and when he was certified of her speech, he was minded to appear before her; but suddenly fear of her prevailed over him and he said to his thoughts, "Haply she will order one of the Jinns to do me die; so 'twere better to have patience and see what Allah shall purpose for me of His Almighty will."

But the Princess and her attendants ceased not wandering about the garden from site to site and side to side till they reached the place in which the Sultan Habib lay in lurking; when Durrat al-Ghawwas there stood still and said in herself, "Now I came not from my capital save on his account, and I would see and be seen by him even as the Voice informed me of him, O you handmaidens; and peradventure has the same informed him of me." Then the Princess and her suite, drawing still nearer to his place of concealment, found a lakelet in the Arab's garden brimful of water amiddlemost whereof stood a brazen lion, through whose mouth the water entered to issue from his tail. Hereat the Princess marvelled and said to her bondswomen, "This be none other than a marvellous lake, together with the lion therein; and when, by the goodwill of Almighty Allah, I shall have returned home, I will let make a lakelet after this fashion, and in it set a lion of brass." Thereupon she ordered them to doff their dress and go down to the piece of water and swim about; but they replied, "O our lady, to hear is to obey your commandment, but we will not strip nor swim save with you." Then she also did off her dress and all stripped themselves and entered the lakelet in a body, whereupon the Sultan Habib looked through the leaves to solace himself with the fair spectacle and he ejaculated, "Blessed be the Lord the best of Creators!"

And when the handmaids waxed aweary of swimming, the Princess commanded them to come forth the water, and said, "Whenas Heaven willeth that the desire of my heart be fulfilled in this garden, what deem you I should do with my lover?" and said they, "'Twould only add to our pleasure and gladness." Said she, "Verily my heart assureth me that he is here and hidden among the trees of yon tangled brake;" and she made signs with her hand where Habib lay in lurking-place; and he, espying this, rejoiced with joy galore than which nothing could be more, and exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great; what meaneth this lady? Indeed, I fear to stay in this stead lest she come hither and draw me forth and put me to shame; and 'twere better that of mine own accord I come out of my concealment and accost her and suffer her to do all she designeth and desireth." So he descended from the topmost of the tree in which he had taken refuge and presented himself before the Princess Durrat Al-Ghawwas, who drew near and cried to him, "O Habib, O welcome to Habib! and is it thus that we have travailed with love of you and longing for you, and where have you been all this time, O my dearling, and O coolth of my eyes and O slice of my liver?" Replied he, "I was in the head of yonder huge tree to which you pointedst with your finger." And as they looked each at other she drew nearer to him and fell to improvising,

"Thou have doomed me, O branchlet of Bán, to despair * Who in
worship and honor was wont to fare,—
Who lived in rule and folk slaved for me * And hosts girded me
round every hest to bear!"

And anon said the Sultan Habib, "Alhamdolillah—laud be to the Lord, who deigned show me your face and your form! Can it be you kennest not what it was that harmed me and sickened me for your sake, O Durrat al-Ghawwas?" Said she, "And what was it hurt you and ailed you?" "It was the love of you and longing for you!" "And who was the first to tell you and make you ware of me?" He replied saying, "One day it so befell, as I was among my family and my tribe, a Jinni Al-Abbus hight became my governor and taught me the accidents of thrust and cut and cavalarice; and before he left he commended your beauty and loveliness and foretold to me all that would pass between you and me. So I was engrossed with affection for you before my eyes had sight of you, and thenceforwards I lost all the pleasures of sleep, nor were meat and eating sweet to me, nor were drink and wine, draughts a delight to me: so Alhamdolillah—praise be to Allah, who deigned conjoin me in such union with my heart's desire!" Hereat the twain exchanged an embrace so long that a swoon came upon them and both fell to the ground in a fainting fit, but after a time the handmaidens raised them up and besprinkled their faces with rose-water which at once revived them.

All this happened, withal the Emir Salamah wotted nothing of what had befallen his son the Sultan Habib nor did his mother weet that had betided her child; and the husband presently went in to his spouse and said, "Indeed this boy has worn us out: we see that o' nights he sleepeth not in his own place and this day he fared forth with the dawn and suffered us not to see a sight of him." Said the wife, "Since the day he went to Al-Abbus, your boy fell into cark and care;" and said the husband, "Verily our son walked about the garden and Allah knoweth that therefrom is no issue anywhither. So there shall you find him and ask him of himself." And they talked over this matter in sore anger and agitation. Meanwhile as the Sultan Habib sat in the garden with the handmaids waiting upon him and upon the Princess Durrat al-Ghawwas, there suddenly swooped upon them a huge bird which presently changed form to a Shaykh seemly of aspect and semblance who approached and kissing their feet humbled himself before the lover and his beloved. The youth marvelled at such action of the Shaykh, and signalled to the Princess as to ask, "Who may be this old man?" and she answered in the same way, "This is the Wazir who caused me forgather with you;" presently adding to the Shaykh, "What may be your need?" "I came hither for the sake of you," he replied, "and unless you fare immediately to your country and kingdom the rule of the Jánn will pass from your hand; for that the Lords of the land and Grandees of the realm seek your loss and not a few of the nobles have asked me saying, O Wazir, where is our Queen? I answered, She is within her palace and to-day she is busied with some business. But such pretext cannot long avail, and thou, unless you return with me to the region of your reign there shall betray you some one of the Marids and the hosts will revolt against you and your rule will go to ruin and you will be degraded from command and sultanate." "What then is your say and what your bidding?" enquired she, and he replied, "Thou have none other way save departure from this place and return to your realm."

Now when these words reached the ear of Durrat al-Ghawwas, her breast was straitened and she waxed sorrowful with exceeding sorrow for severance from her lover whom she addressed in these words, "What sayest you about that you have heard? In very sooth I desire not parting from you and the ruin of my reign as little do I design; so come with me, O dearling of my heart, and I will make you liege lord over the Isles of the Sea and sole master thereof." Hereat the Sultan Habib said in his soul, "I cannot endure parting from my own people; but as for you your love shall never depart from you:" then he spoke aloud, "An you deign hear me, do you abandon that which you purposest and bid your Wazir rule over the Isles and your patrial stead; so shall we twain, I and thou, live in privacy for all time and enjoy the most joyous of lives." "That may never be," was her only reply; after which she cried to the Wazir saying, "Carry me off that I fare to my own land." Then after farewelling her lover, she mounted the Emir-Wazir's back [401] and bade him bear her away, whereat he took flight and the forty handmaidens flew with him, towering high in air. Presently, the Sultan Habib shed bitter tears; his mother hearing him weeping sore as he sat in the garden went to her husband and said, "Knowest you not what calamity has befallen your son that I hear him there groaning and moaning""

Now when the parents entered the garden, they found him spent with grief and the tears trickled adown his cheeks like never-ceasing rain-showers; [402] so they summoned the pages who brought cucurbits of rosewater wherewith they besprinkled his face. But as soon as he recovered his senses and opened his eyes, he fell to weeping with excessive weeping and his father and mother likewise shed tears for the burning of their hearts and asked him, "O Habib, what calamity has come down to you and who of his mischief has overthrown you? Inform us of the truth of your case." So he related all that had betided between him and Durrat-al-Ghawwas, and his mother wept over him while his father cried, "O Habib, do you leave this say and this your desire cast away that the joys of meat and drink and sleep you may enjoy alway." But he made answer, "O my sire, I will not slumber upon this matter until I shall sleep the sleep of death." "Arise thou, O my child," rejoined the Emir, "and let us return homewards," [403] but the son retorted, "Verily I will not depart from this place in which I was parted from the dearling of my heart." So the sire again urged him saying, "These words do you spare nor persist in this affair because therefrom for you I fear;" and he fell to cheering him and comforting his spirits. After a while the Sultan Habib arose and fared homewards beside his sire who kept saying to him, "Patience, O my child, the while I assist you in your search for this young lady and I send those who shall bring her to you." "O my father," rejoined the son, "I can no longer endure parting from her; nay, 'tis my desire that you load me sundry camels with gold and silver and plunder and moneys that I may go forth to seek her: and if I win to my wish and Allah vouchsafe me length of life I will return unto you; but an the term of my days be at hand then the behest be to Allah, the One, the Omnipotent. Let not your breasts be straitened therefor and do you hold and believe that if I abide with you and see not the beloved of my soul I shall perish of my pain while you be standing by to look upon my death. So suffer me to wayfare and attain mine aim; for from the day when my mother bare me 'twas written to my lot that I journey over wild and wold and that I see and voyage over the seas seven-fold." Hereupon he fell to improvising these verses,

"My heart is straitened with grief amain * And my friends and
familiars have wrought me pain;
And whene'er you're absent I pine, and fires * In my heart beweep
what it bears of bane:
O ye, who fare for the tribe's domain, * Cry aloud my greetings to
friends so fain!"

Now when the Emir Salamah heard these his son's verses, he bade pack for him four camel loads of the rarest stuffs, and he largessed to him a she-dromedary laden with thrones of red gold; then he said to him, "Lo, O my son, I have given you more than you askedst." "O my father," replied Habib, "where are my steed and my sword and my spear?" Hereat the pages brought forward a mail-coat Davidian [404] and a blade Maghrabian and a lance Khattian and Samharian, and set them between his hands; and the Sultan Habib donning the habergeon and drawing his sabre and sitting lance in rest backed his steed, which was of the noblest blood known to all the Arabs. Then said he, "O my father, is it your desire to send with me a troop of twenty knights that they may escort me to the land of Al-Yaman and may anon bring me back to you?" "My design," said the sire, "is to despatch those with you who shall befriend you upon the road;" and, when Habib prayed him do as he pleased, the Emir appointed to him ten knights, valorous wights, who dreaded nothing of death however sudden and awesome.

Presently, the youth farewelled his father and mother, his family and his tribe, and joining his escort, mounted his destrier when Salamah, his sire, said to his company, "Be you to my son obedient in all he shall command you;" and said they, "Hearing and obeying." Then Habib and his many turned away from home and addressed them to the road when he began to improvise the following lines,

My longing grows less and far goes my cark * After flamed my heart
with the love-fire stark;
As I ride to search for my soul's desire * And I ask of those
faring to Al-Irák."

On this wise it befell the Sultan Habib and his farewelling his father and mother; but now lend ear to what came of the knights who escorted him. After many days of toil and travail they waxed discontented and disheartened; and presently taking counsel one with other, they said, "Come, let us slay this lad and carry off the loads of stuffs and coin he has with him; and when we reach our homes and be questioned concerning him, let us say that he died of the excess of his desire to Princess Durrat al-Ghawwas." So they followed this rede, while their lord wotted nothing of the ambush laid for him by his followers. And having ridden through the day when the night of offence [405] was dispread, the escort said, "Dismount we in this garden [406] that here we may take our rest during the dark hours, and when morning shall morrow we will resume our road." The Sultan Habib had no mind to oppose them, so all alighted and in that garden took seat and whatever of victual was with them produced; after which they ate and drank their sufficiency and lay down to sleep all of them save their lord, who could not close eye for excess of love-longing. "O Habib, why and wherefore sleepest you not?" they asked, and he answered, "O comrades mine, how shall slumber come to one yearning for his dearling, and verily I will lie awake nor enjoy anything repose until such time as I espy the lifeblood of my heart, Durrat al-Ghawwas."

Thereupon they held their peace; and presently they held council one with other saying, "Who among us can supply a dose of Bhang that we may cast him asleep and his slaughter may be easy to us?" "I have two Miskáls weight [407] of that same," said one of them, and the others took it from him and presently, when occasion served, they put it into a cup of water and presented it to Habib. He hent that cup in hand and drank off the drugged liquid at a single draught; and presently the Bhang wrought in his vitals and its fumes mounted to his head, mastering his senses and causing his brain to whirl round, whereupon he sank into the depths of unconsciousness. Then said his escort, "As soon as his slumber is soundest and his sleep heaviest we will arise and slay him and bury him on the spot where he now sleepeth: then will we return to his father and mother, and tell them that of love-stress to his beloved and of excessive longing and pining for her he died."

And upon this deed of treachery all agreed. So when dawned the day and showed its sheen and shone clear and serene the knights awoke and seeing their lord drowned [408] in sleep they arose and sat in council, and said one of them, "Let us cut his throat from ear to ear;" [409] and said another, "Nay, better we dig us a pit the stature of a man and we will cast him amiddlemost thereof and heap upon him earth so that he will die, nor shall any know anything about him." Hearing this said one of the retinue, whose name was Rabí'a, [410] "But fear you nothing from Almighty Allah and regard you not the favours wherewith his father fulfilled you, and remember you not the bread which you ate in his household and from his family? Indeed 'twas but a little while since his sire chose you out to escort him that his son might take solace with you instead of himself, and he entrusted unto you his heart's core, and now you are pleased to do him die and thereby destroy the life of his parents. Furthermore, say me doth your judgment decide that such ill-work can possibly abide hidden from his father? Now I swear by the loyalty [411] of the Arabs there will not remain for us a wight or any who bloweth the fire alight, however mean and slight, who will receive us after such deed. So do you at least befriend and protect your households and your clans and your wives and your children whom you left in the tribal domain. But now you design utterly to destroy us, one and all, and after death affix to our memories the ill-name of traitors, and cause our women be enslaved and our children enthralled, nor leave one of us anything to be longed for." Said they jeeringly, "Bring what you have of righteous rede:" so said he, "Have you fixed your intent upon slaying him and robbing his good?" and they answered, "We have."

However, he objected again and cried, "Come you and hear from me what it is I advise you, albeit I will take no part [412] in this matter;" presently adding, "Established is your resolve in this affair, and you wot better than I what you are about to do. But my mind is certified of this much; do you not transgress in the matter of his blood and suffer only his crime be upon you; [413] moreover, if you desire to lay hands upon his camels and his moneys and his provisions, then do you carry them off and leave him where he lieth; then if he live, 'twere well, and if he die 'twill be even better and far better." "Thy rede is right and righteous," they replied. Accordingly they seized his steed and his habergeon and his sword and his gear of battle and combat, and they carried off all he had of money and means, and placing him naked upon the bare ground they drove away his camels. Presently asked one of other, "Whenas we shall reach the tribe what shall we say to his father and his mother?" "Whatso Rabi'a shall counsel us," said they, and said Rabi'a, "Tell them, 'We left not travelling with your son; and, as we fared along, we lost sight of him and we saw him nowhere until we came upon him a-swoon and lying on the road senseless: then we called to him by name but he returned no reply, and when we shook him with our hands behold, he had become a dried-up wand. Then seeing him dead we buried him and brought back to you his good and his belongings.'" "And if they ask you," objected one, "'In what place did you bury him and in what land, and is the spot far or near,' what shall you make answer; also if they say to you, 'Why did you not bear his corpse with you,' what then shall be your reply?" Rabi'a to this rejoined "Do you say to them, 'Our strength was weakened and we waxed feeble from burn of heart and want of water, nor could we bring his remains with us.' And if they ask you, 'Could you not bear him a-back; nay, might you not have carried him upon one of the camels?' do you declare that you could not for two reasons, the first being that the body was swollen and stinking from the fiery air, and the second our fear for his father, lest seeing him rotten he could not endure the sight and his sorrow be increased for that he was an only child and his sire has none other."

All the men joined in accepting this counsel of Rabi'a, and each and every exclaimed, "This indeed is the rede that is most right." Then they ceased not wayfaring until they reached the neighbourhood of the tribe, when they sprang from their steeds and openly donned black, and they entered the camp showing the sorest sorrow. Presently they repaired to the father's tent, grieving and weeping and shrieking as they went; and when the Emir Salamah saw them in this case, crowding together with keening and crying for the departed, he asked them, "Where is he, my son?" and they answered, "Indeed he is dead." Right hard upon Salamah was this lie, and his grief grew the greater, so he scattered dust upon his head and plucked out his beard and rent his raiment and shrieked aloud saying, "Woe for my son, ah! Woe for Habib, ah! Woe for the slice of my liver, ah! Woe for my grief, ah! Woe for the core [414] of my heart, ah!"

Thereupon his mother came forth, and seeing her husband in this case, with dust on his head and his beard plucked out and his robe-collar [415] rent, and sighting her son's steed she shrieked, "Woe is me and well-away for my child, ah!" and fainted swooning for a full-told hour. Anon when recovered she said to the knights who had formed the escort, "Woe to you, O men of evil, where have you buried my boy?" They replied, "In a far-off land whose name we wot not, and 'tis wholly waste and tenanted by wild beasts," whereat she was afflicted exceedingly. Then the Emir Salamah and his wife and household and all the tribesmen donned garbs black-hued and ashes whereupon to sit they strewed, and ungrateful to them was the taste of food and drink, meat and wine; nor ceased they to beweep their loss, nor could they comprehend what had befallen their son and what of ill-lot had descended upon him from Heaven.

Such then was the case of them; but as regards the Sultan Habib, he continued sleeping until the Bhang ceased to work in his brain, when Allah sent a fresh, cool wind which entered his nostrils and caused him sneeze, whereby he cast out the drug and sensed the sun-heat and came to himself. Hereupon he opened his eyes and sighted a wild and waste land, and he looked in vain for his companions the knights, and his steed and his sword and his spear and his coat of mail, and he found himself mother-naked, athirst, anhungered. Then he cried out in that Desert of desolation which lay far and wide before his eyes, and the case waxed heavy upon him, and he wept and groaned and complained of his case to Allah Almighty, saying, "O my God and my Lord and my Master, trace my lot an you have traced it upon the Guarded Tablet, for who shall right me save yourself, O Lord of Might that is All-might and of Grandeur All-puissant and All-excellent!" Then he began improvising these verses,

"Faileth me, O my God, the patience with the pride o' me; * Life-
tie is broke and drawing nigh I see Death-tide o' me: To whom shall injured man
complain of injury and wrong * Save to
the Lord (of Lords the Best!) who stands by side o'me."

Now while the Sultan Habib was ranging with his eye-corners to the right and to the left, behold, he beheld a blackness rising high in air, and said he to himself, "Doubtless this dark object must be a mighty city or a vast encampment, and I will hie me there before I be overheated by the sun-glow and I lose the power of walking and I die of distress and none shall know my fate." Then he heartened his heart for the improvising of such poetry as came to his mind, and he repeated these verses,

"Travel, for on the way all goodly things shall find; * And wake
from sleep and dreams if still to sleep inclined! Or victory win and rise and raise you
highmost high * And gain, O
giddy pate, the food for which your soul has pined; Or into sorrow you shall fall with
breast full strait * And ne'er
enjoy the Fame that wooes the gen'rous mind, Nor is there any shall avail to hinder Fate
* Except the Lord of
Worlds who the Two Beings [416] designed."

And when he had finished his verse, the Sultan Habib walked in the direction of that blackness nor left walking until he drew near the ridge; but after he could fare no farther and that walking distressed him (he never having been broken to travel afoot and barefoot withal), and his forces waxed feeble and his joints relaxed and his strong will grew weak and his resolution passed away. But while he was perplexed concerning what he should do, suddenly there alighted between his hands a snow-white fowl huge as the dome of a Hammám, with shanks like the trunk of a palm-tree. The Sultan Habib marvelled at the sight of this Rukh, and saying to himself, "Blessed be Allah the Creator!" he advanced slowly towards it and all unknown to the fowl seized its legs. Presently the bird put forth its wings (he still hanging on) and flew upwards to the confines of the sky, when behold, a Voice was heard saying, "O Habib! O Habib! hold to the bird with straitest hold, else 'twill cast you down to earth and you shall be dashed to pieces limb from limb!" Hearing these words he tightened his grasp and the fowl ceased not flying until it came to that blackness which was the outline of Káf the mighty mountain, and having set the youth down on the summit it left him and still flew onwards. Presently a Voice sounded in the sensorium of the Sultan Habib saying, "Take seat, O Habib; past is that which conveyed you hither on your way to Durrat al-Ghawwas;" and he, when the words met his ear, aroused himself and arose and, descending the mountain slope to the skirting plain, saw therein a cave.

Hereat said he to himself, "If I enter this antre, perhaps shall I lose myself, and perish of hunger and thirst!" He then took thought and reflected, "Now death must come sooner or later, wherefore will I adventure myself in this cave." And as he passed thereinto he heard one crying with a high voice and a sound so mighty that its volume resounded in his ears. But right soon the crier appeared in the shape of Al-Abbus, the Governor who had taught him battle and combat; and, after greeting him with great joy, the lover recounted his love-adventure to his whilome tutor. The Jinni bore in his left a scymitar, the work of the Jann and in his right a cup of water which he handed to his pupil. The draught caused him to swoon for an hour or so, and when he came-to Al-Abbus made him sit up and bathed him and robed him in the rarest of raiment and brought him a somewhat of victual and the twain ate and drank together. Then said Habib to Al-Abbus, "Knowest you not that which befell me with Durrat al-Ghawwas of wondrous matters?" and said the other, "And what may that have been?" whereupon the youth rejoined, "O my brother, Allah be satisfied with you for that He willed you appear to me and direct me and guide me aright to the dearling of my heart and the cooling of mine eyes." "Leave you such foolish talk," replied Al-Abbus, "for where art you and where is Durrat al-Ghawwas? Indeed between you and her are horrors and perils and long tracts of land and seas wondrous, and adventures marvellous, which would amaze and amate the rending lions, and spectacles which would turn grey the sucking child or any one of man's scions." Hearing these words Habib clasped his governor to his breast and kissed him between the eyes, and the Jinni said, "O my beloved, had I the might to unite you with her I would do on such wise, but first 'tis my desire to make you forgather with your family in a moment shorter than an eye-twinkling." "Had I longed for my own people," rejoined Habib, "I should never have left them, nor should I have endangered my days nor would you have seen me in this stead; but as it is I will never return from my wayfaring till such time as my hope shall have been fulfilled, even although my appointed life-term should be brought to end, for I have no further need of existence."

To these words the Jinni made answer, "Learn thou, O Habib, that the cavern in which you art containeth the hoards of our Lord Solomon, David's son (upon the twain be The Peace!), and he placed them under my charge and he forbade me abandon them until such time as he shall permit me, and furthermore that I let and hinder both mankind and Jinn-kind from entering the Hoard; and know thou, O Habib, that in this cavern is a treasure-house and in the Treasury forty closets offsetting to the right and to the left. Now would you gaze upon this wealth of pearls and rubies and precious stones, do you before passing through the first door dig under its threshold, where you shall find buried the keys of all the magazines. Then take the first of them in hand and unlock its door, after which you shall be able to open all the others and look upon the store of jewels therein. And when you shall design to depart the Treasury you shall find a curtain hung up in front of you and fastened around it eighty hooks of red gold; [417] and do you beware how you raise the hanging without quilting them all with cotton." So saying he gave him a bundle of tree-wool he had by him, and pursued, "O Habib, when you shall have raised the curtain you will discover a door with two leaves also of red gold, whereupon couplets are inscribed, and as regards the first distich an you master the meaning of the names and the talismans, you shall be saved from all terrors and horrors, and if you fail to comprehend them you shall perish in that Hoard. But after opening the door close it not with noise nor glance behind you, and take all heed, as I fear for you those charged with the care of the place [418] and its tapestry. And when you shall stand behind the hanging you shall behold a sea clashing with billows dashing, and 'tis one of the Seven Mains which shall show you, O Habib, marvels whereat you shall wonder, and whereof relaters shall relate the strangest relations. Then do you take your stand upon the sea-shore whence you shall descry a ship under way and do you cry aloud to the crew who shall come to you and bear you aboard. After this I wot not what shall befall you in this ocean, and such is the end of my say and the last of my speech, O Habib, and—The Peace!"

Hereat the youth joyed with joy galore than which nothing could be more and taking the hand Of Al-Abbus he kissed it and said, "O my brother, you have given kindly token in what you have spoken, and Allah requite you for me with all weal, and may you be fended from every injurious ill!" Said Al-Abbus, "O Habib, take this scymitar and baldrick yourself therewith, indeed ?twill enforce you and hearten your heart, and don this dress which shall defend you from your foes." The youth did as he was bidden; then he farewelled the Jinni and set forth on his way, and he ceased not pacing forward until he reached the end of the cavern and here he came upon the door whereof his governor had informed him. So he went to its threshold and dug thereunder and drew forth a black bag creased and stained by the lapse of years. This he unclosed and it yielded him a key which he applied to the lock and it forthwith opened and admitted him into the Treasury where, for exceeding murk and darkness, he could not see what he hent in hand. Then said he to himself, "What is to do? Haply Al-Abbus has compassed my destruction!"

And the while he sat on this wise sunken in thought, behold, he beheld a light gleaming from afar, and as he advanced its sheen guided him to the curtain whereof he had been told by the Jinni. But as he looked he saw above it a tablet of emerald dubbed with pearls and precious stones, while under it lay the hoard which lighted up the place like the rising sun. So he hastened him there and found inscribed upon the tablet the following two couplets,

"At him I wonder who from woe is free, * And who no joy
displays [419] when safe is he:
And I admire how Time deludes man when * He views the past; but ah,
Time's tyranny."

So the Sultan Habib read over these verses more than once, and wept till he swooned away; then recovering himself he said in his mind, "To me death were pleasanter than life without my love!" and turning to the closets which lay right and left he opened them all and gazed upon the hillocks of gold and silver and upon the heaps and bales of rubies and unions and precious stones and strings of pearls, wondering at all he espied, and said he to himself "Were but a single magazine of these treasures revealed, wealthy were all the peoples who on earth do dwell." Then he walked up to the curtain whereupon Jinns and Ifrits appeared from every site and side, and voices and shrieks so loudened in his ears that his wits well-nigh flew from his head. So he took patience for a full-told hour when behold, a smoke which spired in air thickened and brooded low, and the sound ceased and the Jinns departed. Hereat, calling to mind the charge of Al-Abbus, he took out the cotton he had by him and after quilting the golden hooks he withdrew the curtain and sighted the portal which the Jinni had described to him.

So he fitted in the key and opened it, after which, oblivious of the warning, he slammed-to the door noisily in his fear and forgetfulness, but he did not venture to look behind him. At this the Jinns flocked to him from every side and site crying, "O you foulest of mankind, wherefore dost you provoke us and disturb us from our stead? and, but for your wearing the gear of the Jann, we had slain you forthright." But Habib answered not and, arming himself with patience and piety, he tarried awhile until the hubbub was stilled, nor did the Jann cry at him any more: and, when the storm was followed by calm, he paced forward to the shore and looked upon the ocean crashing with billows dashing. He marvelled at the waves and said to himself, "Verily none may know the secrets of the sea and the mysteries of the main save only Allah!" Presently, he beheld a ship passing along shore, so he took seat on the strand until Night let down her pall of sables upon him; and he was an-hungered with exceeding hunger and athirst with excessive thirst. But when morrowed the morn and day showed her sheen and shone serene, he awoke in his sore distress and behold, he saw two Mermaidens of the daughters of the deep (and both were as moons) issue forth hard by him. And before long said one of the twain, "Say me, wottest you the mortal who sitteth yonder?" "I know him not," said the other, whereat her companion resumed, "This be the Sultan Habib who comes in search of Durrat al-Ghawwas, our Queen and liege lady." Hearing these words the youth considered them straitly and marvelling at their beauty and loveliness he presently rejoiced and increased in pleasure and delight.

Then said one to other, "Indeed the Sultan Habib is in this matter somewhat scant and short of wits; how can he love Durrat al-Ghawwas when between him and her is a distance only to be covered by the sea-voyage of a full year over most dangerous depths? And, after all this woe has befallen him, why doth he not hie him home and why not save himself from these horrors which promise to endure through all his days and to cast his life at last into the pit of destruction?" Asked the other, "Would heaven I knew whether he will ever attain to her or not!" and her companion answered, "Yes, he will attain to her, but after a time and a long time and much sadness of soul." But when Habib heard this promise of success given by the Maidens of the Main his sorrow was solaced and he lost all that troubled him of hunger and thirst. Now while he pondered these matters there suddenly issued from out the ocean a third Mermaid, which asked her fellows, "Of what are you prattling?" and they answered, "Indeed the Sultan Habib sitteth here upon the sea-shore during this the fourth successive night." Said she, "I have a cousin the daughter of my paternal uncle and when she came to visit me last night I enquired of her if any ship had passed by her and she replied, 'Yea verily, one did sail driven towards us by a violent gale, and its sole object was to seek you.'" And the others rejoined, "Allah send you tidings of welfare!"

The youth hearing these words was gladdened and joyed with exceeding joy; and presently the three Mermaidens called to one another and dove into the depths leaving the listener standing upon the strand. After a short time he heard the cries of the crew from the craft announced and he shouted to them and they, noting his summons, ran alongside the shore and took him up and bore him aboard: and, when he complained of hunger and thirst, they gave him meat and drink and questioned him saying, "Thou! who art thou? Say us, art of the trader-folk?" "I am the merchant Such-and-such," said he, "and my ship foundered albe 'twas a mighty great vessel; but one chance day of the days as we were sailing along there burst upon us a furious gale which shivered our timbers and my companions all perished while I floated upon a plank of the ship's planks and was carried ashore by the send of the sea. Indeed I have been floating for three days and this be my fourth night." Hearing this adventure from him the traders cried, "Grieve no more in heart but be you of good cheer and of eyes cool and clear: the sea voyage is ever exposed to such chances and so is the gain thereby we obtain; and if Allah deign preserve us and keep for us the livelihood He vouchsafed to us we will bestow upon you a portion thereof."

After this they ceased not sailing until a tempest assailed them and blew their vessel to starboard and larboard and she lost her course and went astray at sea. Hereat the pilot cried aloud, saying, "Ho you company aboard, take your leave one of other for we be driven into unknown depths of ocean, nor may we keep our course, because the wind bloweth full in our faces." Hereupon the voyagers fell to beweeping the loss of their lives and their goods, and the Sultan Habib shed tears which trickled adown his cheeks and exclaimed, "Would Heaven I had died before seeing such torment: indeed this is nothing save a matter of marvel." But when the merchants saw the youth thus saddened and troubled of soul, and weeping withal, they said to him, "O Monarch of the Merchants, let not your breast be straitened or your heart be disheartened: hapty Allah shall vouchsafe joy to us and to you: moreover, can vain regret and sorrow of soul and shedding of tears avail aught? Do you rather ask of the Almighty that He deign relieve us and further our voyage." But as the vessel ran through the middle of the main, she suddenly ceased her course and came to a stop without tacking to the right or the left, and the pilot cried out, "O folk, is there any of you who conneth this ocean?" But they made answer, "We know thereof nothing, neither in all our voyage did we see anything resembling it." The pilot continued, "O folk, this main is hight 'The Azure'; [420] nor did any trader at any time therein enter but he found destruction; for that it is the home of Jinns and the house of Ifrits, and he who now withholdeth our vessel from its course is known as Al-Ghashamsham, [421] and our lord Solomon son of David (upon the twain be The Peace!) deputed him to snatch up and carry off from every craft passing, through these forbidden depths whatever human beings, and especially merchants, he might find a-voyaging, and to eat them alive." "Woe to you!" cried Habib. "Wherefore bid us take counsel together when you tellest us that here dwelleth a Demon over whom we have no power to prevail, and you terrifiest us with the thoughts of being devored by him? However, feel you no affright; I will fend off from you the mischief of this Ifrit." They replied, "We fear for your life, O Monarch of the Merchants," and he rejoined, "To you there is no danger."

Thereupon he donned a closely woven mail-coat and armed himself with the magical scymitar and spear; then, taking the skins of animals freshly slain, [422] he made a hood and vizor thereof and wrapped strips of the same around his arms and legs that no harm from the sea might enter his frame. After this he bade his shipmates bind him with cords under his armpits and let him down amiddlemost the main. And as soon as he touched bottom he was confronted by the Ifrit, who rushed forward to make a mouthful of him, when the Sultan Habib raised his forearm and with the scymitar smote him a stroke which fell upon his neck and hewed him into two halves. So he died in the depths; and the youth, seeing the foeman slain, jerked the cord and his mates drew him up and took him in, after which the ship sprang forward like a shaft outshot from the belly [423] of the bow.

Seeing this all the traders wondered with excessive wonderment and hastened up to the youth, kissing his feet and crying, "O Monarch of the Merchants, how did you prevail against him and do him die?" "When I dropped into the depths," replied he, "in order to slay him, I asked against him the aidance of Allah, who vouchsafed His assistance, and on such wise I slaughtered him." Hearing these good tidings and being certified of their enemy's death the traders offered to him their good and gains whereof he refused to accept aught, even a single mustard seed. Now, among the number was a Shaykh well shotten in years and sagacious in all affairs needing direction; and this oldster drew near the youth, and making lowly obeisance said to him, "By the right of Who sent you uswards and sent us youwards, what art you and what may be your name and the cause of your falling upon this ocean?" The Sultan Habib began by refusing to disclose anything of his errand, but when the Shaykh persisted in questioning he ended by disclosing all that had betided him first and last, and as they sailed on suddenly the Pilot cried out to them, "Rejoice you with great joy and make you merry and be you gladdened with good news, O you folk, for that you are saved from the dangers of these terrible depths and you are drawing near the city of Sábúr, the King who overruleth the Isles Crystalline; and his capital (which be populous and prosperous) ranketh first among the cities of Al-Hind, and his reign is foremost of the Isles of the Sea."

Then the ship inclined thither, and drawing nearer little by little entered the harbour [424] and cast anchor therein, when the canoes [425] appeared and the porters came on board and bore away the luggage of the voyagers and the crew, who were freed from all sorrow and anxiety. Such was their case; but as regards Durrat al-Ghawwas, when she parted from her lover, the Sultan Habib, severance weighed sore and stark upon her, and she found no pleasure in meat and drink and slumber and sleep. And presently while in this condition and sitting upon her throne of estate, an Ifrit appeared to her and coming forwards between her hands said, "The Peace of Allah upon you, O Queen of the Age and Empress of the Time and the Tide!" whereto she made reply, "And upon you be The Peace and the pity of Allah and His blessings. What seekest you O Ifrit?" Said he, "There lately has come to us a shipful of merchants and I have heard talk of the Sultan Habib being among them." As these words reached her ear she largessed the Ifrit and said to him, "An you speak sooth I will bestow upon you whatever you wishest." Then, having certified herself of the news, she bade decorate the city with the finest of decorations and let beat the kettledrums of glad tidings and bespread the way leading to the Palace with a carpeting of sendal, [426] and they obeyed her behest. Anon she summoned her pages and commanded them to bring her lover before her; so they repaired to him and ordered him to accompany them.

Accordingly, he followed them and they ceased not faring until they had escorted him to the Palace, when the Queen bade all her pages gang their gait and none remained therein save the two lovers; to wit, the Sultan Habib and Durrat al-Ghawwas. And after the goodly reunion she sent for the Kazi and his assessors and bade them write out her marriage-writ [427] with Habib. He did as he was bidden and the witnesses bore testimony thereto and to the dowry being duly paid; and the tie was formally tied and the wedding banquets were dispread. Then the bride donned her choicest of dresses and the marriage procession was formed and the union was consummated and both joyed with joy exceeding. Now this state of things endured for a long while until the Sultan Habib fell to longing after his parents and his family and his native country; and at length, on a day of the days, when a banquet was served up to him by his bride, he refused to taste thereof, and she, noting and understanding his condition, said to him, "Be of good cheer, this very night you shall find you among your own folk." Accordingly she summoned her Wazir of the Jann, and when he came she made proclamation among the nobles and commons of the capital saying, "This my Wazir shall be my Viceregent over you and whoever shall gainsay him that man I will slay." They replied with "Hearkening to and obeying Allah and yourself and the Minister."

Then turning to her newly-established deputy she said, "I desire that you guide me to the garden in which was the Sultan Habib;" and he replied, "Upon my head be it and on my eyes!" So an Ifrit was summoned, and Habib mounting him pick-a-back together with the Princess Durrat al-Ghawwas bade him repair to the garden appointed, and the Jinni took flight, and in less than the twinkling of an eye bore the couple to their destination. Such was the reunion of the Sultan Habib with Durrat al-Ghawwas and his joyous conjunction; [428] but as regards the Emir Salamah and his wife, as they were sitting and recalling to memory their only child and wondering in converse at what fate might have betided him, lo and behold! the Sultan Habib stood before them and by his side was Durrat al-Ghawwas his bride, and as they looked upon him and her, weeping prevailed over them for excess of their joyance and delight and both his parents threw themselves upon him and fell fainting to the ground. As soon as they recovered the youth told them all that had betided him, first and last, whereupon one congratulated other and the kettledrums of glad tidings were sounded, and a world of folk from all the Badawi tribes and the burghers gathered about them and offered hearty compliments on the reunion of each with other.

Then the encampment was decorated in whole and in part, and festivities were appointed for a term of seven days full-told, in token of joy and gladness; and banquets were arrayed and trays were dispread, and all sat down to them in the pleasantest of life eating and drinking; and the hungry were filled, and the mean and the miserable and the mendicants were feasted until the end of the seventh day. After this they applied them to the punishment of the ten Knights whom the Emir Salamah had despatched to escort his son; and the Sultan Habib gave order that retribution be required from them, and restitution of all the coin and the good and the horses and the camels entrusted to them by his sire. When these had been recovered he commanded that there be set up for them as many stakes in the garden in which he sat with his bride, and there in their presence he let impale [429] each upon his own pale. And thenceforward the united household ceased not living the most joyous of lives and the most delectable until the old Emir Salamah paid the debt of nature, and they mourned him with excessive mourning for seven days. When these were ended his son, the Sultan Habib, became ruler in his stead and received the homage of all the tribes and clans who came before him and prayed for his victory and his length of life; and the necks of his subjects, even the most stubborn, were bowed in abasement before him. On this wise he reigned over the Crystalline Isles of Sabur, his sire-in-law, with justice and equity, and his Queen, Durrat al-Ghawwas, bare to him children in numbers who in due time followed in their father's steps. And here is terminated the tale of Sultan Habib and Durrat al-Ghawwas with all perfection and completion and good omen.
