When it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
treasurer wept for their weeping; then the two brothers embraced
and bade farewell and one said to the other, "All this cometh of
the malice of those traitresses, my mother and thy mother; and
this is the reward of my forbearance towards thy mother and of
thy for bearance towards my mother! But there is no Might and
there is no Majesty save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!
Verily, we are Allah's and unto Him we are returning."
And As'ad em braced his brother, sobbing and repeating these
couplets,

"O Thou to whom sad trembling wights in fear complain! *
     O ever ready whatso cometh to sustain!
The sole resource for me is at Thy door to knock, *
     At whose door knock an Thou to open wilt not deign?
O Thou whose grace is treasured in the one word, Be! *
     Favour me, I beseech, in Thee all weals contain."

Now when Amjad heard his brother's weeping he wept also and
pressing him to his bosom repeated these two couplets,

"O Thou whose boons to me are more than one! *
     Whose gifts and favours have nor count nor bound!
No stroke of all Fate's strokes e'er fell on me, *
     But Thee to take me by the hand I found."

Then said Amjad to the treasurer, "I conjure thee by the One,
Omnipotent, the Lord of Mercy, the Beneficent! slay me before my
brother As'ad, so haply shall the fire be quencht in my heart's
core and in this life burn no more." But As'ad wept and
exclaimed, "Not so: I will die first;" whereupon quoth Amjad, "It
were best that I embrace thee and thou embrace me, so the sword
may fall upon us and slay us both at a single stroke." Thereupon
they embraced, face to face and clung to each other straitly,
whilst the treasurer tied up the twain and bound them fast with
cords, weeping the while. Then he drew his blade and said to
them, "By Allah, O my lords, it is indeed hard to me to slay you!
But have ye no last wishes that I may fulfil or charges which I
may carry out, or message which I may deliver?" Replied Amjad,
"We have no wish; and my only charge to thee is that thou set my
brother below and me above him, that the blow may fall on me
first, and when thou hast killed us and returnest to the King and
he asketh thee, 'What heardest thou from them before their
death?'; do thou answer, 'Verily thy sons salute thee and say to
thee, Thou knewest not if we were innocent or guilty, yet hast
thou put us to death and hast not certified thyself of our sin
nor looked into our case.' Then do thou repeat to him these two
couplets,

'Women are Satans made for woe o' men; *
     I fly to Allah from their devilish scathe:
Source of whatever bale befel our kind, *
     In wordly matters and in things of Faith.'"

Continued Amjad, "We desire of thee naught but that thou repeat
to our sire these two couplets."--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was ad the Two Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Amjad
added, speaking to the treasurer, "We desire of thee naught but
that thou repeat to our sire these two couplets which thou hast
just now heard; and I conjure thee by Allah to have patience with
us, whilst I cite to my brother this other pair of couplets."
Then he wept with sore weeping and began,

"The Kings who fared before us showed *
     Of instances full many a show:
Of great and small and high and low *
     How many this one road have trod!"

Now when the treasurer heard these words from Amjad, he wept till
his beard was wet, whilst As'ad's eyes brimmed with tears and he
in turn repeated these couplets,

"Fate frights us when the thing is past and gone; *
     Weeping is not for form or face alone:
What ails the Nights? Allah blot out our sin, *
     And be the Nights by other hand undone!
Ere this Zubayr-son felt their spiteful hate, *
     Who fled for refuge to the House and Stone:
Would that when Khárijah was for Amru slain *
     They had ransomed Ali with all men they own."

Then, with cheeks stained by tears down railing he recited also
these verses,

"In sooth the Nights and Days are charactered *
     By traitor falsehood and as knaves they lie;
The Desert-reek recalls their teeth that shine; *
     All horrid blackness is their K of eye:
My sin anent the world which I abhor *
     Is sin of sword when sworders fighting hie."

Then his sobs waxed louder and he said,

"O thou who woo'st a World unworthy, learn *
     'Tis house of evils, 'tis Perdition's net:
A house where whoso laughs this day shall weep *
     The next: then perish house of fume and fret!
Endless its frays and forays, and its thralls *
     Are ne'er redeemed, while endless risks beset.
How many gloried in its pomps and pride, *
     Till proud and pompous did all bounds forget,
Then showing back of shield she made them swill *
     Full draught, and claimed all her vengeance debt.
For know her strokes fall swift and sure, altho' *
     Long bide she and forslow the course of Fate:
So look thou to thy days lest life go by *
     Idly, and meet thou more than thou hast met;
And cut all chains of world-love and desire *
     And save thy soul and rise to secrets higher."

Now when As'ad made an end of these verses, he strained his
brother Amjad in his arms, till they twain were one body, and the
treasurer, drawing his sword, was about to strike them, when
behold, his steed took fright at the wind of his upraised hand,
and breaking its tether, fled into the desert. Now the horse had
cost a thousand gold pieces and on its back was a splendid saddle
worth much money; so the treasurer threw down his sword, and ran
after his beast.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      