When it was the Five Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Prince
of the Jinn said to the Prince of mankind, "When thou art quit of
thy complaint, thou shalt return to thy folk in less than the
twinkling of an eye;" and the King's son rejoiced. They fared on
all that night till the morning morrowed when lo! they found
themselves in a green and smiling country, full of trees spireing
and birds quiring and garths fruit-growing and palaces
highshowing and waters a-flowing and odoriferous flowers
a-blowing. Here the King's son of the Jinn alighted from his
steed and, bidding the Prince do the like, took him by the hand
and carried him into one of the palaces, where he found a great
King and puissant Sultan; and abode with him all that day eating
and drinking, till nightfall. Then the King's son of the Jinn
mounted his courser and taking the Prince up behind him, fared on
swiftly through the murks and glooms until morning, when lo, they
found themselves in a dark land and a desert, full of black rocks
and stones, as it were a piece of Hell; and the Prince asked the
Jinni, "What is the name of this land?" Answered the other, "It
is called the Black Country, and belongs to one of the Kings of
the Jinn, by name Zu'l Janahayn, against whom none of the other
Kings may prevail, neither may any enter his dominions save by
his permit; so tarry thou here, whilst I go ask leave." So
saying, he went away and, returning after awhile, they fared on
again, till they landed at a spring of water welling forth of a
black rock, and the King's son of the Jinn said to the King's son
of men, "Alight!" He dismounted and the other cried, "Drink of
this water!" So he drank of the spring without stay or delay;
and, no sooner had he done so than, by grace of Allah, he became
a man as before. At this he joyed with exceeding joy and asked
the Jinni, "O my brother, how is this spring called?" Answered
the other, "It is called the Women's Spring, for that no woman
drinketh thereof but she becometh a man: wherefore do thou praise
Allah the Most High and thank Him for thy restoration and mount."
So the Prince prostrated himself in gratitude to the Almighty,
after which he mounted again and they fared on diligently all
that day, till they returned to the Jinni's home, where the
Prince passed the night in all solace of life. They spent the
next day in eating and drinking till nightfall, when the King's
son of the Jinn asked the Prince, "Hast thou a mind to return to
thy people this very night?" "Yes," he answered; "for indeed I
long for them." Then the Jinni called one of his father's slaves,
Rajiz hight, and said to him, "Take this young man
mounted on thy shoulders, and let not the day dawn ere he be with
his father-in-law and his wife." Replied the slave, "Hearkening
and obedience, and with love and gladness, and upon my head and
eyes!" then, withdrawing awhile, re-appeared in the form of an
Ifrit. When the Prince saw this, he lost his senses for affright,
but the Jinni said to him, "Fear not; no harm shall befal thee.
Mount thy horse and leap him on to the Ifrit's shoulders." "Nay,"
answered he, "I will leave my horse with thee and bestride his
shoulders myself." So he bestrode the Ifrit's shoulders and, when
the Jinni cried, "Close thine eyes, O my lord, and be not a
craven!" he strengthened his heart and shut his eyes. Thereupon
the Ifrit rose with him into the air and ceased not to fly
between sky and earth, whilst the Prince was unconscious, nor was
the last third of the night come before he alighted down with him
on the terrace-roof of his father-in-law's palace. Then said the
Ifrit, "Dismount and open thine eyes; for this is the palace of
thy father-in-law and his daughter." So he came down and the
Ifrit flew away and left him on the roof of the palace. When the
day broke and the Prince recovered from his troubles, he
descended into the palace and as his father-in-law caught sight
of him, he came to meet him and marvelled to see him descend from
the roof of the palace, saying, "We see folk enter by the doors;
but thou comest from the skies." Quoth the Prince, "Whatso Allah
(may He be extolled and exalted!) willeth that cometh to pass."
And he told him all that had befallen him, from first to last,
whereat the King marvelled and rejoiced in his safety; and, as
soon as the sun rose, bade his Wazir make ready splendid
bride-feasts. So did he and they held the marriage festival:
after which the Prince went in unto his bride and abode with her
two months, then departed with her for his father's capital. As
for the damsel's cousin, he died forthright of envy and jealousy.
When the Prince and his bride drew near his father's city, the
King came out to meet them with his troops and Wazirs, and so
Allah (blessed and exalted be He!) enabled the Prince to prevail
against his bride's cousin and his father's Minister. "And I pray
the Almighty" (added the damsel) "to aid thee against thy Wazirs,
O King, and I beseech thee to do me justice on thy son!" When the
King heard this, he bade put his son to death;--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When is was the Five Hundred and Eighty-forth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
favourite had told her tale to the King she said, "I beseech thee
to do me justice by putting thy son to death." Now this was the
fourth day, so the fourth Wazir entered and, kissing the ground
before him, said, "Allah stablish and protect the King! O King,
be deliberate in doing this thou art resolved upon, for the wise
man doth naught till he hath considered the issue thereof, and
the proverb saith, 'Whoso looketh not to his actions' end, hath
not the world to friend; and whoso acteth without consideration,
there befalleth him what befel the Hammam-keeper with his wife.'"
"And what betided him?" asked the King. And the Wazir answered,
"I have heard tell, O King, a tale of the



Wazir's Son and the Hammam-Keepeer's Wife."



There was once a bath-keeper, to whom resorted the notables of
the folk and head men, and one day there came in to him a
handsome youth of the sons of Wazirs who was fat and bulky of
body. So he stood to serve him and when the young man put off his
clothes he saw not his yard, for that it was hidden
between his thighs, by reason of the excess of his fat, and there
appeared thereof but what was like unto a filbert. At
this the bath-keeper fell a-lamenting and smiting hand upon hand,
which when the youth saw, he said to him, "What ails thee, O
bath-keeper, to lament thus?" And he answered, saying, "O my
lord, my lamentation is for thee, because thou art in sore
straits, for all thy fair fortune and goodliness and exceeding
comeliness, seeing thou hast naught wherewithal to do and receive
delight, like unto other men." Quoth the youth, "Thou sayst
sooth, but thou mindest me of somewhat I had forgotten." "What is
that?" asked the bathkeeper, and the youth answered, "Take this
gold piece and fetch me a pretty woman, that I may prove my
nature on her." So he took the money and betaking himself to his
wife, said to her, "O woman, there is come to me in the bath a
young man of the sons of the Wazirs, as he were the moon on the
fullest night; but he hath no prickle like other men, for that
which he hath is but some small matter like unto a filbert. I
lamented over his youth and he gave me this dinar and asked me to
fetch him a woman on whom he might approve himself. Now thou art
worthier of the money than another, and from this no harm shall
betide us, for I will protect thee. So do thou sit with him
awhile and laugh at him and take this dinar from him." So the
good wife took the dinar and rising, adorned herself and donned
the richest of her raiment. Now she was the fairest woman of her
time. Then she went out with her husband and he carried her in to
the Wazir's son in a privy place. When she came in to him, she
looked at him and finding him a handsome youth, fair of favour as
he were the moon at full, was confounded at his beauty and
loveliness; and on like wise his heart and wit were amazed at the
first sight of her and the sweetness of her smile. So he rose
forthright and locking the door, took the damsel in his arms and
pressed her to his bosom and they embraced, whereupon the young
man's yard swelled and rose on end, as it were that of a jackass,
and he rode upon her breast and futtered her, whilst she sobbed
and sighed and writhed and wriggled under him. Now the bathkeeper
was standing behind the door, awaiting what should betide between
them, and he began to call her saying, "O Umm Abdillah, enough!
Come out, for the day is long upon thy sucking child." Quoth the
youth, "Go forth to thy boy and come back;" but quoth she, "If I
go forth from thee, my soul will depart my body; as regards the
child, so I must either leave him to die of weeping or let him be
reared an orphan, without a mother." So she ceased not to abide
with him till he had done his desire of her ten times running,
while her husband stood at the door, calling her and crying out
and weeping and imploring succour. But none came to aid him and
he ceased not to do thus, saying, "I will slay myself!"; till at
last, finding no way of access to his wife, and being distraught
with rage and jealousy, to hear her sighing and murmuring and
breathing hard under the young man, he went up to the top of the
bath and, casting himself down therefrom, died. "Moreover, O
King" (continued the Wazir), "there hath reached me another story
of the malice of women." "What is that?" asked the King, and the
Wazir said, "Know, O King, that it is anent




The Wife's Device to Cheat her Husband."



There was once a woman who had no equal in her day for beauty and
loveliness and grace and perfection; and a certain lewd youth and
an obscene setting eyes on her, fell in love with her and loved
her with exceeding passion, but she was chaste and inclined not
to adultery. It chanced one day that her husband went on a
journey to a certain town, whereupon the young man fell to
sending to her many times a day; but she made him no reply. At
last, he resorted to an old woman, who dwelt hard by, and after
saluting her he sat down and complained to her of his sufferings
for love of the woman and his longing to enjoy her. Quoth she, "I
will warrant thee this; no harm shall befal thee, for I will
surely bring thee to thy desire, Inshallah, --an it please Allah
the Most High!" At these words he gave her a dinar and went his
way. When the morning morrowed she appeared before the woman and,
renewing an old acquaintance with her, fell to visiting her
daily, eating the undertime with her and the evening meal and
carrying away food for her children. Moreover, she used to sport
and jest with her, till the wife became corrupted and
could not endure an hour without her company. Now she was wont,
when she left the lady's house, to take bread and fat wherewith
she mixed a little pepper and to feed a bitch, that was in that
quarter; and thus she did day by day, till the bitch became fond
of her and followed her wherever she went. One day she took a
cake of dough and, putting therein an overdose of pepper, gave it
to the bitch to eat, whereupon the beast's eyes began to shed
tears, for the heat of the pepper, and she followed the old
woman, weeping. When the lady saw this she was amazed and asked
the ancient, "O my mother, what ails this bitch to weep?"
Answered she, "Learn, O my heart's love, that hers is a strange
story. Know that she was once a close friend of mine, a lovely
and accomplished young lady, a model of comeliness and perfect
grace. A young Nazarene of the quarter fell in love with her and
his passion and pining increased on him, till he took to his
pillow, and he sent to her times manifold, begging her to have
compassion on him and show him mercy, but she refused, albeit I
gave her good counsel, saying, "O my daughter, have pity on him
and be kind and consent to all he wisheth." She gave no heed to
my advice, until, the young man's patience failing him, he
complained at last to one of his friends, who cast an enchantment
on her and changed her human shape into canine form. When she saw
what transformation had befallen her and that there was none to
pity her case save myself, she came to my house and began to fawn
on me and buss my hands and feet and whine and shed tears, till I
recognised her and said to her, 'How often did I not warn thee?;
but my advice profited thee naught.'"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      